Review Article
Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials for cosmetics
and personal care markets
Anne Ammala
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Materials Science and Engineering, Private Bag 33, Clayton South MDC,
Victoria, 3169, Australia
Received 09 August 2012, Accepted 08 October 2012
Keywords: biodegradable polymers, controlled release, cosmetics, encapsulation, polymeric carrier
Synopsis
The topical and transdermal delivery of active cosmetic ingredients
requires safe and non-toxic means of reaching the target sites with-
out causing any irritation. Preservation of the active ingredients is
also essential during formulation, storage and application of the
ﬁnal product. As many biologically active substances are not stable
and sensitive to temperature, pH, light and oxidation, they require
encapsulation to protect against unwanted degradation and also to
target speciﬁc and controlled release of the active substance. The
use of biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials offers sev-
eral advantages over other carrier materials. Encapsulation of active
ingredients using biodegradable polymeric carriers can facilitate
increased efﬁcacy and bioavailability and they are also removed
from the body via normal metabolic pathways. This article reviews
current research on biodegradable polymers as carrier or encapsula-
tion materials for cosmetic and personal care applications. Some of
the challenges and limitations are also discussed. Examples of biode-
gradable polymers reviewed include polysaccharides, poly a-esters,
polyalkylcyanoacrylates and polyamidoamine dendrimers.
Re´sume ´
L’administration topique et transdermique de principes actifs cos-
me´tiques exige des moyens su ˆ rs et non toxiques pour atteindre les
sites cibles sans causer d’ irritation. La pre ´servation des ingre ´dients
actifs est e ´galement essentielle au cours de la formulation, du
stockage et de l’application du produit ﬁnal. E ´tant donne ´que beau-
coup de substances biologiquement actives ne sont pas stables et
sensibles a `la tempe ´rature, le pH, la lumie `re et l’oxydation, elles
ont besoin d’encapsulation pour les prote ´ger contre la de ´gradation
inde´sirable et e ´galement de cibler la libe ´ration spe ´ciﬁque et con-
troˆle´e de la substance active. L’utilisation de polyme `res biode ´grad-
ables comme mate ´riaux d’encapsulationoffre plusieurs avantages
par rapport aux autres mate ´riaux porteurs. L’encapsulation des
ingre´dients actifs a `l’aide des supports polyme `res biode ´gradables
peut faciliter l’augmentation de l’efﬁcacite ´et de la biodisponibilite ´;
ceux-cisont e ´galement e ´limine ´s de l’organisme par l’interme ´diaire
des voies me ´taboliques normales. Cet article passe en revue lesrecherches actuelles sur les polyme `res biode ´gradables comme
mate´riaux de support ou d’encapsulation pour les cosme ´tiques et
les applications de soins personnels. Les de ´ﬁs et les limites sont
e´galement discute ´s. Des exemples de polyme `res biode ´gradables
passe´s en revue comprennent des polysaccharides, des poly- a-esters,
des polyalkylcyanoacrylates et les polyamidoaminedendrime `res.
Introduction
A variety of synthetic and natural biodegradable polymers are ﬁnd-
ing increasing applications in cosmetics and personal care markets
as well as pharmaceutical and biomedical ﬁelds. Polymeric carriers
have been employed for a wide variety of therapeutic substances
including active pharmaceutical ingredients [1]. Encapsulation of
active ingredients using biodegradable polymeric carriers can facili-
tate increased drug efﬁcacy and bioavailability. They can also be
chemically functionalized to give enhanced properties over conven-
tional carrier materials.
The main advantages of using biodegradable polymers in cosmet-
ics applications over non-biodegradable polymers is that they are
generally non-reactive when in contact with the human body and
can be broken down or metabolized and removed from the body via
normal metabolic pathways. In contrast, non-biodegradable poly-
mers could potentially accumulate in various body tissues and cause
irritation. The usual mechanism for degradation of biodegradable
polymers is by hydrolysis or enzymatic cleavage of labile heteroatom
bonds, which results in scission of the polymer chains [2]. To be
used in biomedical applications the biodegradable polymer must also
be biocompatible. The chemical nature of the degradation products,
rather than the product itself, is often what inﬂuences biocompati-
bility. For example, polyesters based on polylactide (PLA), polyglyco-
lide (PGA) and their copolymers have been extensively employed as
biomaterials with degradation yielding the corresponding hydroxyl
acids that are safe for in vivo use. Biodegradable polymers derived
from natural polymers, particularly, modiﬁed polysaccharides such
as starch and chitosan are also widely used.
Many personal care products (for skin, hair or body care) contain
biologically active substances such as vitamins and as such require
encapsulation for increased stability of the active materials. As many
biologically active substances are not stable and sensitive to temper-
ature, pH, light and oxidation, they require encapsulation to protect
against unwanted degradation and also to target speciﬁc release ofCorrespondence: Anne Ammala, Private Bag 33 Clayton South MDC
Victoria 3168 Australia. Tel.: +61 3 9545 2688; fax: 61 3 9544
1128; e-mail :anne.ammala@csiro.au
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie 113International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,2 0 1 3 , 35, 113–124 doi: 10.1111/ics.12017

the active substance. This article aims to provide an overview of the
use of biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials for cos-
metics and personal care applications. Recent developments in thisﬁeld are addressed and some of the challenges are identiﬁed.
Topical and transdermal delivery
In general the topical application of cosmetic formulations requires
the successful delivery of active ingredients through the skin’s
lipid barrier to reach the targeted lower layers. Transdermal drugdelivery has been well documented with studies dating back to1924 proposing that the main resistance to transdermal transport
was in a layer of cells joining the stratum corneum to the epider-
mis [3]. In 1944, Winsor and Burch [4] found that skin couldbecome freely permeable to water after the removal of the stratumcorneum. Similarly in 1957, Monash [5] observed that high con-
centrations of topical anaesthetics did not provide any action on
skin until the stratum corneum was stripped away with tape. Inaddition Malkinson in 1958 found that only 1 –2% radiolabelled
hydrocortisone permeated skin but when the skin was stripped
with tape up to 90% was absorbed [6]. These studies demon-strated that the stratum corneum itself limited transport. In whatis regarded as a landmark paper, Kligman in 1964 [7] outlined
that the stratum corneum was not a dead, passive structure as
was previously thought. Kligman described the structure of thestratum corneum as being made up of cellular structures that hetermed ‘corneocytes’. The work of Blank and Scheuplein [8, 9]
later demonstrated the highly impermeable nature of the stratum
corneum and the structure was likened to ‘plastic wrap’. Perme-ability through this layer, in particular for hydrophilic molecules,
has remained as one of the major challenges in effective transder-
mal delivery. Today, the stratum corneum is considered to be verymuch a ‘living’ tissue involved in a number of metabolic pro-cesses. Elias has given a good account of these in a recent publi-
cation [10]. The currently accepted structure of the skin is
described in the following section.
Skin structure
Human skin is comprised of several distinct layers as represented in
Fig. 1. The epidermis is the outermost layer and acts as a protec-tive sheath against environmental inﬂuences. It consists of severallayers starting with the stratum corneum to the basal cell layer
and is continually being regenerated. The dermis lies beneath the
epidermis and contains collagen and glycosaminoglycans. Thislayer is where collagen and elastin are synthesized and it containsthe blood vessels, nerves, sweat glands, hair follicles and sebaceous
glands. The hypodermis or sub-cutaneous layer contains the adi-
pose tissue (subcutaneous fat) and provides a thermal barrier.
The stratum corneum is the upper 10 –20-lm layer that is a
lipid-rich matrix composed primarily of ceramides, cholesterol and
fatty acids that are assembled into a multi-lamellar bilayer struc-ture. Elias proposed a ‘brick and mortar’ model [12] which is oftenused to describe the structure of the stratum corneum where the
‘bricks’ represent the protein rich cells (corneocytes) embedded into
the intercellular lipid domains or ‘mortar’ as shown in Fig. 2 [13].Corneodesmosomes act to link neighbouring corneocytes togetherand provide structural integrity to the stratum corneum. It should
also be noted that there are wide variations in permeability
observed at different body sites (e.g. face vs. legs vs. palms) whichtogether with factors such as age and external environment can all
inﬂuence the skins barrier function [13].
The lipophilic stratum corneum contains around 13% water. In
contrast, the viable epidermis becomes signiﬁcantly more hydro-philic containing about 50% water. The water content in the der-
mis is even higher at 70% [14]. Highly lipophilic actives do not
transfer well across the highly lipophilic stratum corneum into themore aqueous epidermis, and it is important to understand theseproperties to design carriers to achieve the desired delivery of cos-
metic active substance.
Skin penetration pathways
A number of pathways are possible for the transportation of mole-
cules through the skin. The intercellular route occurs at the inter-face between cells through the lipid bilayers following a tortuous
permeation pathway. In contrast, transcellular pathways can occur
directly through the cells. These pathways are depicted in Fig. 3[15]. Transportation via the hair follicles or sweat ducts is also pos-sible. Permeation enhancers can also alter the pathway. Some com-
mon enhancers are discussed in the next section.
It is generally reported that transport of molecules through the
epidermis is restricted to molecules of low molecular mass(<500 Da) and moderate lipophilicity (partition coefﬁcients, log K
o/w
Figure 1 Schematic representation of a cross-section of human skin [11] .
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 114Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
values between 1 and 3), having enough solubility in the lipid
domain of the stratum corneum while still having sufﬁcient hydro-philic nature to allow partitioning into the epidermis [14]. Someexamples of drugs successfully administered via transdermal patches
range in size from nicotine (162 Da) to oxybutinin (359 Da) [3].
There are also numerous articles describing the use of mathe-
matical models to predict skin permeability [16 –19]. Generally,
these are based on quantitative structure-permeability relationships
(QSPR), diffusion mechanisms or combinations of both.
Permeation enhancers
The disruption of the structural organization of the intercellular
lipid domain of the stratum corneum can enhance skin permeation[14]. This may be achieved via chemical enhancers or physical
techniques. In summary, the use of physical techniques includes
Iontophoresis (the use of an electric current to enable penetration of
charged species), Electroporation (application of a voltage pulse), So-
nophoresis (the use of ultrasound energy) and Microneedling (needle
arrays that pierce the upper epidermis). These techniques are out-
lined in more detail in a number of recent articles [3, 20, 21].Generally, biodegradable polymers fall into the category of chem-
ical permeation enhancers, however, they have also been reported
as materials used in microneedle arrays [22]. Interestingly, thepaper reports on the use of biodegradable microneedles made frompoly-lactide-co-glycolide (PLGA) which are left on the skin and can
release encapsulated drugs by slow release. The study also reported
that the microneedles made from PLGA were of sufﬁcient mechani-cal strength that they did not break when inserted into the skin.
Speciﬁc examples of the use of biodegradable polymers as encap-
sulation materials for the delivery and controlled release of cos-metic active ingredients are presented in the following sections.
Polysaccharides
Chitosan
Chitosan is a natural polymer that contains a high percentage of
glucosamine within its structure as shown in Fig. 4. Chitosan isderived from chitin via a deacetylation reaction.
Chitosan has been widely reported for use in topical and trans-
dermal delivery systems largely due to its non-toxicity and suscepti-bility to degradation. It has been reported that chitosan has theability to enhance permeation across the skin by altering the struc-
ture of keratin. It also increases the water content of the stratum
corneum and cell membrane ﬂuidity. Further, due to its positivecharge under slightly acidic conditions, it can depolarize thenegatively charged cell membrane and in doing so, it decreases the
membrane potential and drives the active component or drug
through the skin [23].
The mechanism by which chitosan and its derivatives can be
used as a transdermal permeation enhancer has been studied
recently by He et al.[24]. The study involved infrared examination
of the secondary structure changes of keratin in stratum corneumof mice as well as the examination of water content. HaCaT cells
were employed as cell models. A shift of one of the amide absorp-
tion peaks to lower wavelength after treatment with chitosan indi-cated a change in keratin structure. Further peak deconvolutionalso indicated the b-turning structure of keratin was converted to
b-sheeting and random coiling or a-helix. The authors suggest that
these secondary structural changes to keratin lead to a more loosestructure with greater degree of freedom for carbon movement thatcan lead to enhanced transdermal permeation of drugs.
In addition to the structural changes to keratin described previ-
ously, the use of chitosan and its derivatives has also been demon-strated to increase water content of the stratum corneum [24]. Once
again, the use of infrared absorption gave information on water con-
tent by examination of the ratio of amide I (1700 –1600 cm
/C01) and
amide II bands (1600 –1500 cm/C01). Amide I shows the absorbance
of water and proteins in skin, whereas amide II shows only protein
absorbance. The derivative N-trimethyl chitosan had the greatest
Figure 3 Schematic representation of intercellular and transcellular perme-
ation pathways through the stratum corneum [15].
 Figure 4 Structure of chitosan.
Figure 2 Schematic representation of the bricks and mortar model of the
stratum corneum [13] .
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 115Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
effect of increased water content. The study also demonstrated that
the increased amount of water was able to be retained in the stratum
corneum for signiﬁcant lengths of time.
Encapsulation of active ingredients using chitosan is also possi-
ble. Controlled release has been demonstrated by increasing the vis-
cosity of the polymer matrix [25]. A skin permeability study
conﬁrmed that encapsulation of retinoic acid with chitosan deliv-ered the retinoic acid at much slower and controlled rates as com-
pared to free retinoic acid (shown in Fig. 5) [25]. This ability to
control delivery of retinoic acid is important in reducing skin irrita-tion.
The same author has also reported on crosslinking and coacer-
vation methods to trap actives within the chitosan matrix. This
encapsulation technology under the tradename Chitosphere
TMhas
been developed by Ivrea Laboratories, Inc. [26]. Water insolubleactive ingredients like retinoic acid are able to be delivered topically
in the form of encapsulated microparticles less than 100 lmi n
size. This is achieved by using the active agent, a high-viscositychitosan biopolymer and a suitable dispersing agent (e.g. soybean
oil) in the presence of anionic polymers (e.g. poly(acrylic acid)) at
pH values greater than 6. A wide range of actives can be deliveredusing this technology without the use of surfactants or emulsiﬁers,making it particularly appealing for topical delivery systems.
In the ﬁeld of gene therapy, chitosan has been reported to
enhance drug delivery of nucleic acids such as DNA [23]. Recently,a topical cream for the treatment of asthma has been reported[27]. The research involved transdermal application of chitosan
encapsulated siNRPA (a small interfering peptide receptor). Results
showed successful delivery to the lungs upon topical application inmice with signiﬁcantly decreased lung inﬂammation.
In addition to topical skin delivery, chitosan-based systems have
also been reported in oral and transmucosal delivery applications[28–30]. Chitosan appears to boost immune responses by enhanc-
ing the uptake of antigen across nasal mucosa and as a result, it is
a good candidate for effective mucosal vaccine delivery systems
[28].
Hyaluronic acid
Hyaluronic acid is an anionic polysaccharide that consists of N-ace-
tyl-glucosamine and glucuronic acid (Fig. 6). It is naturally foundthroughout the body in extracellular tissue, cartilage and synovial
ﬂuid.
Skin application of hyaluronic acid containing cosmetics has
been reported to achieve antiwrinkle effects via its ability to effec-tively moisturize and enhance elasticity of the skin [31, 32]. Hyal-
uronic acid is a very effective topical humectant, attracting water
from the air to plump the skin. It is also commonly used as aninjectable dermal ﬁller under the name Restylane
®.
In addition to its moisturizing properties, the biodegradability of
hyaluronic acid also makes it very attractive for wound healingapplications [33 –35]. Laserskin
®(developed by Fidia Advanced Bio-
polymers, Italy) is a membrane made from benzyl esteriﬁed hyal-
uronic acid. It is used as a delivery system to transfer keratinocyte
cells from tissue culture to skin wounds, in particular burns, withhigh rates of healing [33].
The stability of hyaluronic acid-based nanoemulsions as trans-
dermal carriers was recently reported [36]. Electrostatic, steric and
hydrophobic effects were found to play a key role in the stability ofthe emulsions. Encapsulation experiments with vitamin E also dem-
onstrated that the emulsions were capable of successfully carrying
lipophilic additives. In further studies the same group investigatedskin penetration and carried out histological experiments usingvitamin E-hyaluronic acid nanoemulsions [37]. It was reported that
the formulation had desirable stratum corneum permeability, efﬁ-
cient partitioning capacity and was able to be diffused deeper intothe dermis compared with the control group containing ethanolsolution. The small size of the emulsion droplets (50 –200 nm) was
also noted as signiﬁcant as this enabled greater surface-to-volume
ratio which has greater contact points between the emulsion andthe skin. In addition, the authors claim that the ﬂexibility of the
Figure 6 Structure of hyaluronic acid (sodium hyaluronate).
Figure 7 Typical structure of a cyclodextrin.
Figure 5 all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) permeation through a skin model
using Franz diffusion cells for free retinoic acid ( ) or a chitosan-entrapped
retinoic acid ( ▲and ) as a function of the concentration of high molecu-
lar weight chitosan (HMW) [25].
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 116Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
droplets was important in the skin penetration as they were capa-
ble of adapting their shape when passing through the stratum cor-
neum.
Although the exact mechanism of action of topically applied
hyaluronic acid has not been fully explored, Brown et al. [38] have
described some key factors in a recent review article. It is known
that the degree of hydration of the stratum corneum inﬂuencesskin permeability and with the excellent hydrating properties of
hyaluronic acid, this can lead to enhanced topical delivery of
actives across the skin. The authors suggest that this increasedhydration of surface layers not only enhances drug absorptionacross the stratum corneum, but also facilitates the retention of the
drug within the more hydrated epidermal layers (possibly by expo-
sure of potential drug binding sites) which can decrease the drugdiffusion into lower skin layers, limiting systemic absorption.
Cyclodextrins
Cyclodextrins are cyclic oligosaccharides consisting of glucopyra-
nose units bound with 1, 4 bonds having hydrophobic inner cavi-
ties and hydrophilic outer surfaces (Fig. 7). An importantcharacteristic of cyclodextrins is their ability to form inclusion com-plexes with hydrophobic (lipophilic) molecules bound within the
inner cavity, making them ideal compounds for cosmetics delivery
systems (Fig. 8).
Cyclodextrins and chemically modiﬁed cyclodextrins have been
utilized for a wide range of applications in cosmetics and personal
care markets including controlled release of fragrances, stabilization
of drugs, encapsulation of vitamins, reduction of the dermal pene-tration of preservatives and masking of odours [39, 40].
Cyclodextrins have also been reported to enhance effectiveness of
sunscreen formulations [41]. The study reported both an in vitro
model, using ethanol-propylene glycol solution, as well as a morerealistic model using an oil-in water emulsion. It was demonstrated
that the photostability of sunscreen agents can be improved by
encapsulation. Photodecomposition products were analysed bychromatography and mass spectrometry where it was revealed thatthe cyclodextrin inclusion complex decreased the degradation of
UV absorber signiﬁcantly. In addition it was suggested that any
potential for skin irritation is also decreased by encapsulation.
Some examples of marketed cosmetic formulations using cyclo-
dextrins are listed in Table 1 [42].
The mechanism by which cyclodextrins can inﬂuence transder-
mal drug delivery has been reported recently by Kear et al. [43].
The study looked at hydroxypropyl- b-cyclodextrin (HPCD). Because
of its large molecular size it does not penetrate into the skin. The
authors found that pre-treatment of skin with up to 20wt% HPCDdid not alter transdermal ﬂux and skin accumulation of the modelcorticosteroids which suggested the stratum corneum barrier prop-
erties remained intact. In addition, differential scanning calorimetry
(DSC) examination showed that the lipid structure had no signs oflipid disorganization or altered ﬂuidity. An increase in structuraldisorder of the epidermis has been correlated with a decrease in
lipid melting temperature. The study did show a decrease in melt
temperature did occur and this was attributed to disruption of theprotein structure due to hydrogen bonding interactions between
the hydroxyl groups of the cyclodextrin and hydrogen donating
keratins in the stratum corneum. Overall the authors concludedthat the penetration enhancement properties of cyclodextrins aremost likely due to increased in aqueous solubility of the drugs and
hence the thermodynamic driving force for permeation across the
skin.
Alginates
Alginates are linear polysaccharides derived from brown algae that
are comprised of varying proportions of 1,4-linked b-D-mannuronic
acid (M) and a-L-glucuronic acid (G) as shown in Fig. 9. The com-
position can vary from homopolymeric blocks of consecutiveG-blocks, consecutive M-blocks or alternating MG-blocks.
Widely used as thickening agents in cosmetic formulations, algi-
nates are also reported for drug delivery applications as they can
form gels with divalent metal ions such as calcium. The fact thatrelatively mild conditions can be used to incorporate drugs withinalginates makes them excellent candidates for delivery of proteins
that can minimize any denaturation [44].
A transdermal nicotine patch containing alginate has been
reported where the release rate can be controlled by polymer con-
centration, drug concentration, membrane thickness and degree of
cross-linking [45]. Similarly, the anti-inﬂammatory drug meloxi-
Figure 8 Schematic representation of a cyclodextrin inclusion complex.Table 1 Examples of marketed cosmetic cyclodextrin formulations. Adapted
from [42]
Trade Name Active substance Application Company
Lipo CD-SA Salicylic acid Delivery
system
for salicylic
acid(keratolytic)Lipo Chemicals,
Inc. (US)
Lipo CD-E Tocopherol Antiageing Lipo Chemicals,
Inc. (US)
Lipo CD-OMC Ethylhexyl
methoxycinnamateSunscreen Lipo Chemicals,
Inc. (US)
Biolin Sebo
Care Impure
Skin Cream– Acne prone
skinGanassini (Italy)
Cellutex L-Carnitine Anticellulite
creamRegina Neu
Cosmetic
(Germany)
Mirakelle Vitamin A Antiageing Vor Laboratories,
Inc (Sweden)
Novo Flex Vitamins A and E Antiageing Revlon (South
America)
Self-Action
Super tanDihydroxyacetone Self-tanning Este `e Lauder (US)
Klorane Extra
Gentle DryShampoo– Dry shampoo Klorane, Pierre
Fabre DermoCosmetique (France)
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 117Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
cam has been encapsulated for controlled release through a chito-
san-alginate transdermal ﬁlm [46].
Alginates are also commonly reported for wound dressings
where they can maintain a moist microenvironment and minimizebacteria at the wound site. Incorporation of silver or zinc can fur-
ther enhance antimicrobial activity [44].
L’Oreal have described the production of spherical alginate cap-
sules for cosmetics [47]. These capsules can contain water-soluble
or dispersible active agents as well as liposoluble additives and can
include biological compounds, coloured pigments, sunscreens andperfume.
Starch
Starch and modiﬁed starch have been used in cosmetics as absor-
bents, thickeners and ﬁlm forming agents. Most starches consist of
a mixture of two polysaccharide types: amylose and amylopectin
(Fig. 10). The ratio of amylase to amylopectin varies depending onthe type of starch. Film forming properties are dependent on this
ratio with high amylose content (50 –75%) having higher gelling
tendencies and creating stronger ﬁlms [48].
The Grain Processing Corporation (Iowa, US) markets a range of
starch additives for use in a wide variety of personal care products
[49]. One example is Zeina
®B860 hydroxypropyl starch. The ﬁlm
forming properties of this starch allow for encapsulation of activeingredients in the form of oil droplets. A water-soluble protective
ﬁlm can be formed via spray drying methods.
Thixogel
TMis a thixotropic oil-encapsulating emulsion system
that comprises natural starches [50, 51]. The formulations formsemi-solids upon standing but become pourable gels and lotions
after moderate mechanical agitation. Thixogel emulsions are
described as being particularly useful for delivery of hydrophobicbotanical plant extracts and volatile compounds such as essentialoils, ﬂavours, perfumes as well as vitamins [50].
Encapsulation of the essential oil Melissa Ofﬁcinalis (Lemon Balm)
using modiﬁed starch has been reported recently [52]. The mainactive compounds contain phenolic acids that have antioxidant,
antifungal and antiviral properties. To use the lemon balm extract
as a nutraceutical, encapsulation is required to protect the phenolicacids against oxidation and evaporation. The study revealed thatlemon balm could be effectively encapsulated in modiﬁed starch (as
well as a cyclodextrin complex) using emulsiﬁcation and spray dry-
ing techniques.
The ﬁlm forming properties of starch-chitosan blends have been
reported in the formation of a transdermal patch [48]. The patch
has been used to deliver tamarind fruit extract for applications
such as skin lightening. Various properties were assessed using arange of different starch types (corn, tapioca and potato). Films
made using corn starch were found to give higher porosity.
Other reports of encapsulation using starch include the encapsu-
lation of soy-based ferulic acid derivatives that have UV absorbingand antioxidant properties [53]. These are attractive as natural
replacements for petroleum-based sunscreen active ingredients.
Starch-encapsulation was even found to enhance the ultravioletabsorbance of the feruloylated lipids with encapsulated compoundsonly requiring half of the coverage to block the same amount or
more UV radiation as the un-encapsulated additive.
Poly a-esters (PGA, PLA, PLGA, PCL)
This class of polymer includes polyglycolide (PGA), poly(L-lactide)
(PLA), poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and poly( e-caprolactone)
(PCL) (structures shown in Fig. 11). These polymers are able to
undergo degradation via hydrolytic cleavage of the ester linkages
that make up the polymer backbone. For PGA, PLA and PLGA, thedegradation by-products, lactic acid and glycolic acid, are water-
Figure 9 Structure of alginate.
Amylose
Amylopectin
Figure 10 Structures of amylose and amylopectin.
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 118Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
soluble and non-toxic products of normal metabolism [28] with the
rate of degradation dependent on the chain length (molecularweight) and the lactide/glycolide ratio [31]. PCL has a much
slower degradation rate and gives less acidic degradation products
[54, 55]. The acid dissociation constants (pKa) of lactic acid (3.9)and glycolic acid (3.8) are lower than that for 6-hydroxy-caproic
acid (4.8) (the product from hydrolysis of PCL) so the use of PCL
may be advantageous if acidic environments could interfere withthe encapsulated material during release. The slower degradationrate of PCL may also be tailored for a faster release through copoly-
merization or blending with other polymers [54 –56].
In the area of drug delivery, the use of poly a-ester polymers to
encapsulate proteins, vaccines and anticancer drugs have beenwidely reported [57], [1], [58]. The possibility of needle-free vac-
cines has also been discussed through the production of topically
applied particles [59]. Similarly, oral delivery of hormones andinsulin may be improved through encapsulation, offering advanta-
ges of decreased dosage frequency [1]. Various methods have been
used to synthesize such materials including emulsiﬁcation, solventevaporation and interfacial deposition [1].
In cosmetic applications, the use of PLA has been recently
reported to encapsulate retinyl retinoate as an anti-wrinkle treat-
ment [60]. Skin penetration studies revealed the PLA retinyl retino-ate microspheres (Fig. 12) were able to penetrate into deeper layersof skin ( ~eight-fold higher) compared with formulations without
PLA. A faster rate of wrinkle improvement was also reported with
no adverse effects.
PLGA encapsulated urea has been described for use in topical
delivery creams [61]. Urea is used as a moisturizing agent and a
common problem for urea containing cosmetics is its lack of stabil-
ity in water containing products. PLGA microcapsules of 1 –5lm
were used to stabilize the urea and provide an effective means of
controlled release.The encapsulation of ascorbic acid using PLGA and the subse-
quent degradation behaviour over 8 weeks has been described in arecent study [62]. Ascorbic acid is a water-soluble vitamin with avariety of biological and dermatological functions and it is very
unstable to air, light, heat and moisture. The study involved the
synthesis of a range of encapsulated nanospheres where the parti-cle size varied with different PLGA/ascorbic acid ratios. As theamount of ascorbic acid was increased from 15% up to 50% the
particles went from small spherical shape to larger, more irregular
shapes. This is important as the authors report that the size andshape of the encapsulated particles plays a key role in the adhesion
and interaction with the body’s cells. Degradation was studied in a
physiological solution and assessed by a number of techniquesincluding scanning electron microscopy (SEM) as shown in Fig. 13.Here it can be seen that the particles agglomerate and then create
a porous ﬁlm before complete degradation. It was also noted that
for all samples less than 10% of ascorbic acid was released withinthe ﬁrst 24 days, allowing for a successful and controlled rate ofrelease.
The encapsulation of the highly lipophilic sunscreen, octyl meth-
oxycinnamate (OMC), using PCL carrier systems has been recentlyreported [63]. The study used tape stripping experiments and imag-
ing with the lipophilic dye Nile red to investigate the enhanced top-
ical delivery of the encapsulated sunscreen. Results showed thatencapsulation using PCL gave a 3.4-fold increase in the level ofOMC in the stratum corneum and after some time the dye was
detected at greater depths (up to 60 lm) within the skin.
Polyalkylcyanoacrylates (PACA)
Polyalkylcyanoacrylates (Fig. 14) are another class of biodegrad-
able polymer that are reported mainly for use as surgical glues andskin adhesives [23]. One example is the product Dermabond
TM,
2-octylcyanoacrylate, used as a topical skin adhesive to close
wounds [64]. Shorter chain alkyl derivatives are described as being
tissue toxic and causing inﬂammatory reactions and as such theyare limited to non-medicinal uses.
Cyanoacrylate, when placed in contact with body moisture,
polymerizes in an exothermic reaction. A strong, ﬂexible andwaterproof bond forms that can stay in place for 7 –14 days, even-
tually sloughing off with the epidermis [64].
For more general cosmetics applications, L’Oreal have described
the use of polyalkylcyanoacrylates in encapsulating oils for treat-
Figure 11 Structures of poly a-esters.
Figure 12 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of PLA retinyl reti-
noate microspheres, mean diameter 12.87 lm [60].
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 119Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
ment of the upper layers of the epidermis [65]. Examples of the
active oils described include a-tocopherol and trigylcerides rich in
linoleic acids.
Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers
Dendrimers are polymeric molecules composed of branched mono-
mers emanating radially from a central core. Polyamidoamine
(PAMAM) dendrimers, as shown in Fig. 15, are the most com-monly reported for bioapplications [66]. The number of branchpoints moving from the core to the periphery is known as the gen-
eration number (G1, G2, G3, G4, etc.) and this number can be
altered to enhance the drug loading capacity [67]. The interior ofthe dendrimer contains void spaces that are well suited for encap-sulation of guest molecules. In addition, the outer surface containsa number of potentially reactive sites that can be tailored to alter
the dendrimers’ solubility, making this class of polymers more efﬁ-
cient carriers compared to other conventional complexing agents.
An important characteristic that distinguishes dendrimers from
more conventional polymers is their intrinsic viscosity [68]. With
traditional linear polymers, larger molecular weights increase the
viscosity. Dendrimers, however, will reach a maximum viscositywhich then decreases with increasing molecular weight. This fea-
ture can be of signiﬁcant beneﬁt to cosmetic formulators, where
highly viscous formulations may be avoided.
A patent by L’Oreal [69] has described the use of terminal
hydroxyl functionalized polyester dendrimers in combination with
ﬁlm forming polymers for use in cosmetics intended for skin
application as well as to keratinous ﬁbres, nails or mucous mem-branes. The patent describes how the disadvantages associated withusing high molecular weight polymers can be avoided through the
use of dendrimers. Low-viscosity formulations using dendrimers
were found to have superior performance including good sensoryproperties.
In other patents by L’Oreal, the use of PAMAM dendrimers in
deodorant compositions has been described and claimed asdeodorant active agents, with odour absorbing properties [70].The dendrimers were able to be formulated in water-based compo-
sitions and were non-irritating and non-toxic. The use of dendri-
mers in self-tanning compositions has also been described byL’Oreal [71]. In this application, dendrimer containing composi-
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 13 SEM images of (a) PLGA nanospheres and (b) PLGA/ascorbic acid 85/15%, (c) PLGA/ascorbic acid 70/30% and (d) PLGA/ascorbic acid 50/50%
particles after 2, 24 and 39 days of degradation [62].
Figure 14 Structure of PACA (R =alkyl group)
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 120Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
tions were shown to have enhanced intensity and good fastness
over time, in particular good resistance to washing. In addition
the colouration was obtained in faster times compared to usingno dendrimer.
Revlon have reported the use of PAMAM dendrimers in cosmet-
ics and personal care applications for the encapsulation of salicylic
acid in anti-acne compositions [72]. In addition to the salicylic acidbeing sequestered in the core, the free acid groups on salicylic acid
are also able to ionically bond to the amino groups on the surface
of the PAMAM dendrimer. The resulting complex stabilizes the sali-cylic acid, until such time that it is applied to the skin where it dis-associates from the PAMAM carrier. Various compositions are
described including creams, shampoos and conditioners, toners as
well as make-up. One advantage of using PAMAM complexed sali-cylic acid in make-up is that the reaction with iron oxide pigmentscan be avoided [72].
The use of PAMAM dendrimers was also recently reported for
assisting the transdermal diffusion of riboﬂavin [73]. The low watersolubility of riboﬂavin is a limiting factor for high skin load of this
vitamin and this was overcome through the use of water-soluble
PAMAM carriers. Similarly, the water solubility of quinolone anti-microbial drugs was reported to increase by using PAMAM dendri-mers in topical applications [74]. The antimicrobial activity of the
encapsulated/complexed quinolones was found to be similar to that
for the pure drugs.
The Australian-based company, Starpharma [75], has commer-
cialized several products based on dendrimer technology. Although
these are mainly in pharmaceutical applications, wider opportuni-
ties in cosmetics are being developed to provide encapsulation, sol-ubilization and controlled release.
The mechanism of dendrimer systems for skin delivery is still not
well understood; however, several theories have been proposed in arecent review [76]. These include i) the ability of dendrimers toincrease the thermodynamic activity by increasing the concentra-
tion and solubility of the drug, ii) the use of penetration enhancers
with dendrimers to ﬂuidize the lipid bilayers and iii) follicular pene-tration.
Limitations of existing technology
One of the challenges (e.g. with alginates) is matching the physical
properties of the biodegradable gel to the need in a speciﬁc applica-
tion. Like many other hydrogels, alginates have very limitedmechanical stiffness. This may be altered by varying the molecularweights and altering the degree of cross-linking or by using vari-
ants on the chemical structures. However, covalent cross-linking
may sometimes be detrimental to the active material being encap-sulated and thorough removal of unreacted species is necessary[44]. Microcapsules employed in cosmetics may need to be easily
crushed on the skin (e.g. under the action of slight massage)
without leaving any residue. They also need to have sufﬁcientrigidity so that their structure is not modiﬁed during storage or
manufacture into the cosmetic composition [47].
Another challenge involves the encapsulation of proteins. Preser-
vation of the protein structure during encapsulation as well as dur-ing its controlled release from the system is essential and this has
been the topic of some recent reviews [77, 78]. Proteins can
become inactive or denatured by a number of chemical and physi-cal (conformational) factors. The presence of water or water-oilinterfaces during the preparation of encapsulated proteins can often
be problematic and can cause protein unfolding or aggregation.
This can be overcome through the addition of additives (e.g. poly-ols) or by using alternative non-aqueous manufacturing techniques
(e.g. solid-in-oil-in-oil) [78].
In addition to the need for improved manufacturing of protein
encapsulation there is also a need to maintain the protein stabil-ity during its release from the biodegradable polymer shell. The
major challenge here is for poly a-esters where the polymers
degrade into acidic products. The drop in pH can inactivate pro-teins. This can be overcome by co-encapsulation of a basic saltsuch as Mg(OH)
2[78]. Another approach to overcome the pH
decrease is to create porosity within the microsphere that allows
acidic biodegradation products to diffuse out and for buffer com-ponents to permeate within [78]. As mentioned previously theuse of alternative polymers such as PCL may also be considered
as it is less acidic.
Both fungal and bacterial degradation can be a problem in cos-
metic formulations using biodegradable polymers. For example, in
the starch containing Thixogel
TMsystems, it is necessary to add
preservatives to extend the shelf life. Natural preservatives likeTea Tree oil and CITRICIDAL (oil from grapefruit seeds) have pro-ven to be effective and low levels of benzalkonium chloride may
also be added, serving a dual purpose of antimicrobial agent and
emulsiﬁer [50].
Future directions
In today’s cosmetic and personal care markets, there is a growing
trend towards more complex and sophisticated products with con-
sumers expecting improved product performance and formulators
desiring a greater competitive advantage. The use of biodegradablepolymers as encapsulation materials offers many opportunities forimproved stability and delivery of active substances.
Figure 15 Structure of PAMAM monomer unit and spherical dendrimer [66].
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 121Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
It is foreseeable that this technology will continue to expand to
keep up with demands for multifunctional products that comprise
more than one active substance. In addition, the gap between cos-metics and pharmaceuticals is closing with the increasing use andavailability of so-called ‘cosmeceuticals’. These products contain
many natural substances like vitamins, oils, and therapeutic
extracts that would greatly beneﬁt from the use of this technology.This growing consumer demand for products containing natural
ingredients can be expected to result in more widespread use anddesign of new tailor-made biodegradable polymers for the encapsu-
lation of active ingredients.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge the research resources of
CSIRO Materials Science and Engineering and would also like tothank Dr. Susan Wong-Holmes and Dr. Katherine Dean for proof
reading the manuscript.
References
1. Kumari, A., Yadav, S.K. and Yadav, S.C.
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles baseddrug delivery systems. Colloid Surf B-Bioin-
terfaces. 75,1–18 (2010).
2. Piskin, E. Biodegradable polymers as bioma-
terials. J. Biomater. Sci. Polymer. Edn. 6, 775
–795 (1994).
3. Prausnitz, M.R., Mitragotri, S. and Langer, R.
Current status and future potential of trans-dermal drug delivery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
3, 115 –124 (2004).
4. Winsor, T. and Burch, G.E. Rate of invisible
perspiration through living and dead stratumcorneum. Arch. Int. Med. 74, 437 (1944).
5. Monash, H. Location of the superﬁcial bar-
rier to skin penetration. J. Invest. Derm. 29,
367 (1957).
6. Malkinson, F.D. Studies in the percutaneous
absorption of C14 labeled steroid by use of the
gas ﬂow cell. J. Invest. Derm. 31, 19 (1958).
7. Kligman, A.M. The biology of the stratum
corneum. In: The Epidermis . (Montagna, W.
Lobitz, W.B., eds.), pp. 387 –433. Academic
Press, New York (1964).
8. Blank, I.H. Transport across the stratum
corneum. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 14, (Sup-
plement 3)23 –29 (1969).
9. Blank, I.H. and Scheuplein, R.J. Permeability
of the skin. Physiol. Rev. 51, 702 –747
(1971).
10. Elias, P.M. The epidermal permeability bar-
rier: from the early days at harvard toemerging concepts. J. Investig. Dermatol.
122, xxxvi –xxxix (2004).
11. Association of the British Pharmaceutical
Industry (ABPI). Skin Structure and Function .
Available at: http://www.abpischools.org.
uk/page/modules/skin/skin2.cfm, accessed
27 March 2012.
12. Elias, P.M. Epidermal lipids, barrier function,
and desquamation. J. Invest. Dermatol. 80
(1s), 44s –49s (1983).
13. Harding, C.R. The stratum corneum: struc-
ture and function in health and disease. Der-
matol. Ther. 17,6–15 (2004).
14. Fo ¨rster, M., Bolzinger, M.-A., Fessi, H. and
Brianc ¸on, S. Topical delivery of cosmetics
and drugs. Molecular aspects of percutane-ous absorption and delivery. Eur. J. Derm.
19, 309
–323 (2009).
15. Moghimi, H.R., Williams, A.C. and Barry, B.W.
Stratum corneum and barrier performance; a
model lamellar structural approach. In: Percu-
taneous Absorption . (Bronaugh, R.L. and Mai-
bach, H.I., eds.), pp. 515 –553. Marcel Dekker,
New York (1999).
16. Barbero, A.M. and Frasch, H.F. Transcellu-
lar route of diffusion through stratum corne-
um: results from ﬁnite element models.
J. Pharm. Sci. 95, 2186 –2194 (2006).
17. Chen, L., Lian, G. and Han, L. Use of “Bricks
and Mortar” model to predict transdermal
permeation: model development and initial
validation. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 47, 6465 –
6472 (2008).
18. Chen, L., Lian, G. and Han, L. Modeling
transdermal permeation. Part I. Predicting
skin permeability of both hydrophobic andhydrophilic solutes. AIChE J. 56, 1136 –
1146 (2010).
19. Mitragotri, S., Anissimov, Y.G., Bunge, A.L.
et al. Mathematical models of skin perme-
ability: an overview. Int. J. Pharm. 418, 115
–129 (2011).
20. Cross, S.E. and Roberts, M.S. Physical
enhancement of transdermal drug applica-tion: is delivery technology keeping up with
pharmaceutical development? Curr. Drug
Deliv. 1,8 1–92 (2004).
21. Guy, R.H. Current status and future pros-
pects of transdermal drug delivery. Pharm.
Res.13, 1765 –1769 (1996).
22. Park, J.-H., Allen, M. and Prausnitz, M.
Polymer microneedles for controlled-release
drug delivery. Pharm. Res. 23, 1008 –1019
(2006).
23. Pawar, K.R. and Babu, R.J. Polymeric and
lipid-based materials for topical nanoparticle
delivery systems. Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carr.
Syst. 27, 419 –459 (2010).
24. He, W., Guo, X., Xiao, L. and Feng, M.
Study on the mechanisms of chitosan and
its derivatives used as transdermal penetra-
tion enhancers. Int. J. Pharm. 382, 234 –
243 (2009).
25. Cattaneo, M.V. Topical delivery systems
based on polysaccharide microspheres. In:Delivery System Handbook for Personal Careand Cosmetic Products . (Rosen, M.R., ed.), pp.
273–282. William Andrew, Inc., Norwich,
NY (2005).
26. Cattaneo, M., Chitosan Microparticles for the
Topical Delivery of Water Insoluble Active
Agents . US patent 2004247632. IVREA,
Inc., Qunicy, MA. (2004).
27. Wang, X., Xu, W., Mohapatra, S., Kong, X.,
Li, X., Lockey, R. and Mohapatra, S.Prevention of airway inﬂammation with
topical cream containing imiquimod and
small interfering RNA for natriureticpeptide receptor. Genet. Vacc. Ther. 6,7
(2008).
28. Mishra, N., Goyal, A.K., Khatri, K. et al. Biode-
gradable polymer based particulate carrier(s)for the delivery of proteins and peptides. Anti-
Inﬂam. Antiallergy Agents Med Chem 7, 240 –
251 (2008).
29. Ghosn, B., van de Ven, A.L., Tam, J., Gillenwater,
A., Sokolov, K.V., Richards-Kortum, R. et al.
Efﬁcient mucosal delivery of optical contrast
agents using imidazole-modiﬁed chitosan. J. Bio-
med. Opt. 15, 015003 (2010).
30. Pedro, A.S., Cabral-Albuquerque, E.,
Ferreira, D. and Sarmento, B. Chitosan: an
option for development of essential oil deliv-ery systems for oral cavity care? Carbohydr.
Polym. 76, 501 –508 (2009).
31. Basavaraj, K.H., Johnsy, G., Navya, M.A.,
Rashmi, R. and Siddaramaiah. Biopolymersas transdermal drug delivery systems in
dermatology therapy. Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug.
Carr. Syst. .27:155 –185 (2010).
32. Pavicic, T., Gauglitz, G.G., Lersch, P.,
Schwach-Abdellaoui, K., Malle, B., Korting,
H.C. and Farwick, M. Efﬁcacy of cream-
based novel formulations of Hyaluronic Acidof different molecular weights in anti-wrin-kle treatment. J. Drugs Dermatol. 10, 990 –
1000 (2011).
33. Price, R.D., Berry, M.G. and Navsaria, H.A.
Hyaluronic acid: the scientiﬁc and clinicalevidence. J. Plast. Reconstr. Aesthet. Surg.
60, 1110 –1119 (2007).
34. Teh, B.M., Shen, Y., Friedland, P.L., Atlas,
M.D. and Marano, R.J. A review on the use
of hyaluronic acid in tympanic membrane
wound healing. Expert. Opin. Biol. Ther. 12,
23–36 (2012).
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 122Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
35. Abbruzzese, L., Rizzo, L., Fanelli, G.,
Tedeschi, A., Scatena, A., Goretti, C.,
Macchiarini, S. and Piaggesi, A. Effective-ness and safety of a novel gel dressing inthe management of neuropathic leg ulcers
in diabetic patients: a prospective double-
blind randomized trial. Int. J. Low Extrem.
Wounds. 8, 134 –140 (2009).
36. Kong, M. and Park, H.J. Stability investiga-
tion of hyaluronic acid based nanoemulsionand its potential as transdermal carrier. Car-
bohydr. Polym. 83, 1303 –1310 (2011).
37. Kong, M., Chen, X.G., Kweon, D.K. and
Park, H.J. Investigations on skin permeationof hyaluronic acid based nanoemulsion astransdermal carrier. Carbohydr. Polym. 86,
837–843 (2011).
38. Brown, M.B. and Jones, S.A. Hyaluronic
acid: a unique topical vehicle for the local-ized delivery of drugs to the skin. J. Eur.
Acad. Derm. Venereol. 19, 308 –318 (2005).
39. Matsuda, H. and Arima, H. Cyclodextrins in
transdermal and rectal delivery. Adv. Drug
Deliv. Rev. 36,8 1–99 (1999).
40. Gonnet, M., Lethuaut, L. and Boury, F. New
trends in encapsulation of liposoluble vita-mins. J. Control Release. 146, 276 –290
(2010).
41. Scalia, S., Villani, S., Scatturin, A., Vandelli,
M.A. and Forni, F. Complexation of the sun-screen agent, butyl-methoxydibenzoylme-
thane, with hydroxypropyl- b-cyclodextrin.
Int. J. Pharm. 175, 205 –213 (1998).
42. Tarimci, N. Cyclodextrins in the cosmetic
ﬁeld. In: Cyclodextrins in Pharmaceutics, Cos-
metics, and Biomedicine: Current and FutureIndustrial Applications . (Bilensoy, E., ed.),
pp. 131 –144. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, NJ (2011).
43. Kear, C.L., Yang, J., Godwin, D.A. and Fel-
ton, L.A. Investigation into the mechanismby which cyclodextrins inﬂuence transder-
mal drug delivery. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 34,
692–697 (2008).
44. Lee, K.Y. and Mooney, D.J. Alginate: proper-
ties and biomedical applications. Prog.
Polym. Sci. 37, 106 –126 (2012).
45. Solomon, M.C. and Oraceska, B., Cross-linked
Alginate Transdermal Medicine Delivery
Devices . US patent 5484604. Chatﬁeld Phar-
maceuticals Ltd., Kramer Mews, England,(1996).
46. Elmotasem, H. Chitosan-alginate blend ﬁlms
for the transdermal delivery of meloxicam.
J. Pharm. Sci. 3,1 2–29 (2008).
47. Handjani, R.M., Kauffmann, M. and Hugue-
nin, F., Process for the Preparation of Alginate
Capsules, Apparatus for producing said Capsules
and Cosmetic Compositions Containing saidCapsules . US patent 5204111. L’Oreal, Paris,
France, (1993).48. Viyoch, J., Patcharaworakulchai, P., Song-
mek, R., Pimsan, V. and Wittaya-Areekul, S.
Formulation and development of a patchcontaining tamarind fruit extract by usingthe blended chitosan-starch as a rate-con-
trolling matrix. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 25, 113 –
125 (2003).
49. Freers, S.O. Starch-based delivery systems.
In:Delivery System Handbook for Personal Care
and Cosmetic Products: Technology, Applica-tions and Formulations . (Rosen, M.R., ed.),
pp. 741 –760. William Andrew Inc.,
Norwich, NY (2005).
50. Wille, J.J., Methods for Preparation of a Thixo-
tropic Microemulsion for Skin Care Formula-tions . US patent 2010098734. Individual,
Chesterﬁeld, NJ (2010).
51. Wille, J.J. Thixogel: a starch matrix encapsu-
lation technology for topical drug and cos-metic delivery. In: Skin Delivery Systems:
Transdermals, Dermatologicals and Cosmetic
Actives . (Wille, J.J., ed.), pp. 223 –245. Black-
well Publishing, Oxford, UK (2006).
52. Mourtzinos, I., Papadakis, S.E., Igoumenidis, P.
and Karathanos, V.T. Encapsulation of MelissaOfﬁcinalis leaf’s active compounds in b-cyclo-
dextrin and modiﬁed starch. Procedia Food Sci-
ence. 1,1 6 7 9 –1685 (2011).
53. Compton, D.L., Kenar, J.A., Laszlo, J.A. and
Felker, F.C. Starch-encapsulated, soy-based,ultraviolet-absorbing composites with feru-
loylated monoacyl- and diacylglycerol lipids.
Ind. Crops Prod. 25,1 7–23 (2007).
54. Sinha, V.R., Bansal, K., Kaushik, R.,
Kumria, R. and Trehan, A. Poly- ecaprolac-
tone microspheres and nanospheres: an over-view. Int. J. Pharm. 278,1–23 (2004).
55. Cha, Y. and Pitt, C.G. The biodegradability
of polyester blends. Biomaterials 11, 108 –
112 (1990).
56. Vaida, C., Mela, P., Kunna, K., Sternberg,
K., Keul, H. and Mo ¨ller, M. Microparticles
for drug delivery based on functional polyc-
aprolactones with enhanced degradability:loading of hydrophilic and hydrophobic
active compounds. Macromol. Biosci. 10,
925–933 (2010).
57. Sinha, V.R. and Trehan, A. Biodegradable
microspheres for protein delivery. J. Control
Release. 90, 261 –280 (2003).
58. Ye, M., Kim, S. and Park, K. Issues in long-
term protein delivery using biodegradablemicroparticles. J Control Release. 146, 241 –
260 (2010).
59. Gu, H. and Roy, K. Topical permeation enh-
ancers efﬁciently deliver polymer micro andnanoparticles to epidermal Langerhans’
cells. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Tech. 14, 265 –273
(2004).
60. Kim, H., Kim, M., Quan, Y. et al. Novel anti-
wrinkle effect of cosmeceutical product withnew retinyl retinoate microsphere using
biodegradable polymer. Skin Res. Tech. 18,
70–76 (2012).
61. Haddadi, A., Aboofazeli, R., Erfan, M. and
Farboud, E.S. Topical delivery of urea encap-
sulated in biodegradable PLGA microparti-
cles: O/W and W/O creams. J. Microencapsul.
25, 379 –386 (2008).
62. Stevanovic ´, M., Savic ´, J., Jordovic ´, B. and
Uskokovic ´, D. Fabrication, in vitro degrada-
tion and the release behaviours of poly(dl-lactide-co-glycolide) nanospheres containing
ascorbic acid. Colloids Surf., B 59, 215 –223
(2007).
63. Alvarez-Roma ´n, R., Naik, A., Kalia, Y., Guy,
R.H. and Fessi, H. Skin penetration and dis-
tribution of polymeric nanoparticles. J. Con-
trol Release. 99,5 3–62 (2004).
64. Dermabond topical skin adhesive. Int. J.
Trauma Nurs. 5:29–31 (1999).
65. Handjani, R.-M. and Ribier, A., Composition
for the Cosmetic and/or Pharmaceutical Treat-ment of the Upper Layers of the Epidermis by
Topical Application to the Skin, and Correspond-
ing Preparation Process . US patent
20010010824. L’Oreal, Paris, France(2001).
66. Eichman, J.D., Bielinska, A.U., Kukowska-
Latallo, J.F., Donovan, B.W. and Baker, J.R.Bioapplications of PAMAM Dendrimers. In:Dendrimers and Other Dendritic Polymers .
(Frechet, J.M.J. and Tomalia, D.A., eds.), pp.
441–461. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
New York (2002).
67. Parveen, S., Misra, R. and Sahoo, S.K.
Nanoparticles: a boon to drug delivery, ther-apeutics, diagnostics and imaging. Nanomed.
Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 8, 147 –166 (2012).
68. Mourey, T.H., Turner, S.R., Rubinstein, M.,
Frechet, J.M.J., Hawker, C.J. and Wooley, K.L.Unique behaviour of dendritic macromole-cules - intrinsic viscosity of polyether dendri-
mers. Macromolecules 25, 2401 –2406
(1992).
69. Tournilhac, F. and Simon, P.,
Cosmetic or
Dermatological Topical Compositions Compris-
ing Dendritic Polyesters . US patent
US6287552. L’Oreal, Paris, France (2001).
70. Forestier, S., Rollat-Corvol, I. and Rollat, C.I.,
Deodorant Composition and Use Thereof patent
US6001342. L’Oreal, Paris, France (1999).
71. Allard, D. and Forestier, S., Composition
Comprises Active Self Bronzing Agent and Den-
drimer Type Polymer –used for Artiﬁcial Tan-
ning of Skin, gives more Rapid Development ofSkin Colour and Brown Shade which closelyresembles Natural Sun Tanning Patent
US6399048-B1. L’Oreal, Paris, France
(2002).
72. Snyder, F., Wolf, B.A. and Snyden, F., Cos-
metic Compositions having Keratolytic and Anti-
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 123Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
Acne Activity . US patent 5449519. Revlon
Consumer products Corp. New York, NY,
(1995).
73. Filipowicz, A. and Wołowiec, S. Solubility
and in vitro transdermal diffusion of riboﬂa-
vin assisted by PAMAM dendrimers. Int. J.
Pharm. 408, 152 –156 (2011).
74. Cheng, Y., Qu, H., Ma, M., Xu, Z., Xu, P.,
Fang, Y. and Xu, T. Polyamidoamine (PA-
MAM) dendrimers as biocompatible carriersof quinolone antimicrobials: an in vitrostudy. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 42, 1032 –1038
(2007).
75. Starpharma Dendrimer Platform Technol-
ogy. Available at: http://www.starpharma.com/, accessed 9 August 2012.
76. Sun, M.J., Fan, A.P., Wang, Z. and Zhao, Y.J.
Dendrimer-mediated drug delivery to theskin. Soft Matter 8, 4301 –4305 (2012).
77. Bilati, U., Allemann, E. and Doelker, E. Stra-
tegic approaches for overcoming peptide andprotein instability within biodegradablenano- and microparticles. Eur. J. Pharm.
Biopharm. 59, 375 –388 (2005).
78. Perez, C., Castellanos, I.J., Costantino, H.R.,
Al-Azzam, W. and Griebenow, K. Recenttrends in stabilizing protein structure upon
encapsulation and release from bioerodible
polymers. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 54, 301 –
313 (2002).
©2012 Society of Cosmetic Scientists and the Socie ´te´Franc ¸aise de Cosme ´tologie
International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,35, 113–124 124Biodegradable polymers as encapsulation materials A. Ammala
