60 | NATURE | VOL 528 | 3 D EcEmb ER  2015PERsPEcTiVE
doi:10.1038/nature16069
The contentious nature of soil organic 
matter
Johannes Lehmann1,2* & markus Kleber3,4*
soil organic matter contains more organic carbon than global vege -
tation and the atmosphere combined (Fig. 1). For this reason, the 
release and conversion into carbon dioxide or methane of even a 
small proportion of carbon contained in soil organic matter can cause 
quantitatively relevant variations in the atmospheric concentrations of 
these greenhouse gases1. Moreover, organic matter retains nutrients as 
well as pollutants in the soil, which improves plant growth and protects 
water quality2. Soils are also an important source of aquatic carbon, with 
implications for biogeochemical processes in rivers, lakes and estuaries3. 
Despite its recognized importance, there is a widely divergent view of the 
nature of soil organic matter.
Biological, physical and chemical transformation processes convert 
dead plant material into organic products that are able to form intimate 
associations with soil minerals, making it difficult to study the nature 
of soil organic matter. Early research based on an extraction method 
assumed that a ‘humification’ process creates recalcitrant (resistant to 
decomposition) and large ‘humic substances’ to make up the majority of 
soil ‘humus’ (see Box 1). However, these ‘humic substances’ have not been 
observed by modern analytic techniques. This lack of evidence means 
that ‘humification’ is increasingly questioned, yet the underlying theory 
persists in the contemporary literature, including current textbooks4–6.
Here we argue in favour of a soil continuum model (SCM) that focuses 
on the ability of decomposer organisms to access soil organic matter and 
on the protection of organic matter from decomposition provided by soil 
minerals. Viewing soil organic matter as a continuum spanning the full 
range from intact plant material to highly oxidized carbon in carboxylic 
acids7 represents robust science and will facilitate the way we communicate 
between disciplines and with the public. Only such an evidence-based 
approach can allow for the development of mechanistic solutions to cli -
mate, water quality and soil productivity issues (Fig. 1). The resulting 
knowledge should be integrated into conceptual and mechanistic models 
for the purpose of predicting carbon dioxide emissions from soils in a 
warming world, as well as of keeping water supplies clean, and of improv -
ing and sustaining the ecosystem services of the world’s soils. Research 
aimed at reliable predictions of soil organic matter turnover should focus 
on investigating its spatial arrangement within the mineral matrix, the 
fine-scale redox environment, microbial ecology and interaction with min -
eral surfaces under moisture and temperature conditions observed in soils.The exchange of nutrients, energy and carbon between soil organic matter, the soil environment, aquatic systems and 
the atmosphere is important for agricultural productivity, water quality and climate. Long-standing theory suggests that 
soil organic matter is composed of inherently stable and chemically unique compounds. Here we argue that the available 
evidence does not support the formation of large-molecular-size and persistent ‘humic substances’ in soils. Instead, soil 
organic matter is a continuum of progressively decomposing organic compounds. W e discuss implications of this view of 
the nature of soil organic matter for aquatic health, soil carbon–climate interactions and land management.
1Soil and Crop Sciences, School of Integrated Plant Sciences, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. 2Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future,  
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. 3Department of Crop and Soil Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. 4Institut für Bodenlandschaftsforschung, Leibniz Zentrum  
für Agrarlandschaftsforschung (ZALF), Müncheberg, Germany.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.Figure 1 | Traditional and emergent views of the nature of soil organic 
matter affect how we predict and manage soil, air and water. Traditional ‘humification’ concepts limit observations of soil organic matter to its 
solubility in alkaline extracts, unlike the emergent view of organic matter 
based on solubility in water and its accessibility to microorganisms. Soils are an important source of organic matter in aquatic ecosystems and are responsible for half of the atmospheric carbon recycling. Carbon stocks and flux values are from ref. 1, except where noted otherwise: brown numbers are stocks in Pg C and blue numbers are flows in Pg C yr
−1. 
*Disaggregated value from 119 Pg C yr−1 total emissions. †3% of total 
carbon consumed by fire104. ‡Estimate to balance soil carbon exports.Atmospheric CO2
829 
Rivers59*
Vegetation
420–620
1.7
Soil
3,500–4,80012359*
1.6
0.05† 61‡
Soil structure ;
water and
nutrient
storage and
provisionCO2
evolution
and
temperature
responseTraditional view
Applies solubility in alkalin e
solution as criterion; over- or 
underestimates reactivit y
in water (electron shuttling,
metal adsorption)  
Emergent view
Studies organic matter in
water without alkaline extraction;
considers those forms that are 
actually soluble in water  Traditional view
Relies on organic matter quality
for prediction of emissions;
assumes greater temperature 
sensitivity of persistent organic 
matter 
Emergent view
Relies on accessibility of organi c
matter and microbial ecology;
considers temperature dependence 
of enzymes, transport and 
adsorption of organic matter  
Traditional view
Relies on formation of
stable ‘humus’; 
observes organic matter 
properties in alkaline extractsEmergent view
Focuses on microbial access to
soil organic matter;
emphasizes the need to manage 
carbon /f_lows rather than 
carbon stocks Water
quality
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH3 D EcEmb ER  2015 | VOL 528 | NATURE | 61Historical reliance on an operational proxy
Soil organic matter research is difficult because organic compounds are 
thoroughly mixed with and often adhere to soil minerals. In arable soil, 
organic matter typically makes up less than 5% and could historically 
be discerned only by its dark coloration. Before advanced spectroscopic 
methods became available in the early 1990s, research on soil organic 
matter required that the organic phase be separated from the mineral 
phase through an extraction procedure. The most efficient of these sepa -
ration procedures in terms of mass extracted8 is an extraction with alkali  
(Box 1), which dates back to a report published in 1786 (ref. 9). Although 
the extraction is incomplete, selective and prone to creating artefacts  
(Box 1), the procedure became widely adopted and its products univer -
sally accepted as experimental proxies for soil organic matter.
Concerns that alkaline preparations are not appropriate representatives 
of soil organic matter were raised as early as 1888 (ref. 10) and 50 years 
later it was proposed11 that ‘humic’ nomenclature should be dropped 
because the term relates only to a material obtained by a specific proce -
dure. Unfortunately, these concerns were dismissed rather than disproved. 
Among the thousands of publications on ‘humic substances’ , not one inde -
pendently confirms—for example, by direct spectroscopic observation—
that the ‘humic substances’ extracted by alkali are components of organic 
matter that exist separately in soil environments.
Among the strongest arguments in favour of discarding the notion of 
‘humic substances’ is the absence of any agreement within the broader 
scientific community on how such materials are defined. ‘Humic sub -
stances’ may be described in the soil sciences in three different ways: 
strictly operationally according to what can be extracted with an alkaline 
solution, with further subcategories of ‘humic’ and ‘fulvic’ acids as well 
as unextractable ‘humins’; as an existing substance that is not merely an 
operational construct; or as a combination of the two (Box 1). Different 
research communities use the same vocabulary with very different con -
notations, to the point of being contradictory: in soil science, ‘humic substances’ are thought to have large molecular masses
12; in the envi -
ronmental sciences, they are characterized as small fragments13; and a 
classic textbook of aquatic geochemistry describes them as compounds 
of variable mass and composition14. These views have evolved over time, 
so that now it is not obvious what the term ‘humic substances’ is intended 
to convey unless it is explicitly defined. Despite this uncertainty and 
new insight from modern spectroscopic techniques (Box 2), the prod -
ucts of alkaline extraction continue to be treated as physically existing  
entities5,6,15, with research efforts focused on aligning theory with the 
behaviour and properties of a soil component proxy that is defined solely 
by solubility at an alkaline pH.
Reconciling models of soil organic matter
At present, three competing models for the fate of organic inputs to soil 
can be distinguished: (1) classic ‘humification’ , (2) ‘selective preservation’ 
and (3) ‘progressive decomposition’ (Fig. 2).
All three models assume that fragments of plants and soil fauna are first 
broken up into small pieces at the onset of decomposition. Evidence that 
such breakdown of dead leaves or roots takes place comes from the obser -
vation that the majority of organic matter inputs to soil decays within the 
first year16. It is further known that plant residues must be degraded by 
enzymes to a relatively small size (typically less than 600 Da) before they 
can be actively transported across the cell walls of microorganisms17,18. 
In terrestrial ecosystems, so-called exo-enzymes perform this function  
outside the microorganism19,20. Thus, at any time within a living soil, a 
continuum exists of many different organic compounds at various stages of 
decay21, moving down a thermodynamic gradient from large and energy-  
rich compounds to smaller energy-poor compounds20.
(1) The ‘humification’ model is the oldest of the three concepts22. In 
its original definition ‘humification’ assumes a further transformation or 
synthesis of the initial decomposition products into large, dark-coloured 
compounds12 (Fig. 3). The resulting macromolecules were thought to be 
rich in carbon and nitrogen structures specific to ‘humification’ , resist -
ant to decomposition12 and consequently, older than the rest of the soil organic matter. Given the lack of a universally accepted definition of 
‘humic substances’ across disciplines and the lack of evidence for their 
physical existence independent of the alkaline extraction procedure, it is 
no surprise that there is no agreement on the processes and pathways of 
‘humic substance’ formation either (Box 2). These ‘humic substances’ are 
variously considered to be ecologically useful (providing cation exchange 
capacity), chemically reactive (interacting with iron, aluminium and other Box 1
Traditional approach to the study 
of soil organic matter
Since first used over 200 years ago, the alkaline extraction 
technique has undergone many iterations but the principle  
has remained identical. In its modern version105, the procedure 
involves the addition of a sodium hydroxide solution with a very 
high pH of 13 to a soil sample. At this pH, most oxygen-containing  
functional groups in organic matter are ionized, making organic 
compounds bearing such groups much more soluble in water67. 
After adding protons to the solubilized organic materials, a dark  
solid precipitates that is commonly called ‘humic acid’. The organic matter that remains soluble after reacidification is called 
‘fulvic acid’. The considerable proportion of organic matter that 
does not respond to the treatment, either for a lack of ionizable 
functional groups or because it was shielded from the harsh 
alkaline treatment by mineral protection, is named ‘humin’. This multi-step procedure created the need to distinguish 
several categories of what constitutes soil organic matter. These 
categories vary widely between authors. The conceptual problem with defining ‘humic substances’ by an extraction procedure is 
threefold:
(1) The extraction is always incomplete, leaving 50%–70% 
of the organic carbon unextracted, which is then defined as 
the insoluble ‘humin’ fraction
106. This precludes the use of the 
extractable ‘humic and fulvic acids’ as true representatives 
of total soil organic matter. The alkaline solution will also 
extract portions of soil fractions that are not meant to be 
included in ‘humic substances’, such as living biomass, 
simple and identifiable biomolecules (often included as ‘non-humic’ substances in ‘humus’), dissolved organic matter or 
undecomposed leaves and roots (isolated as particulates). 
 
How these separately assessed fractions should be 
distinguished from the unextracted ‘humins’ (that are part  
of ‘humic substances’) is often unclear. The sum of ‘humic’  
and ‘non-humic’ substances is defined as ‘humus’, a term  
that is sometimes considered to be synonymous to soil  
organic matter5,6, sometimes not19, and is sometimes not  
used at all4,5,8,22.
(2) The harsh alkaline treatment at pH 13 ionizes 
compounds that would never dissociate within the wider soil  
pH range (pH 3.5 to pH 8.5), giving the resulting ‘humic’ and ‘fulvic’ fractions the character of highly selective preparations 
with an exaggerated chemical reactivity rather than that of 
 
true isolates.
(3) The development of this extraction method preceded 
theory, tempting scientists to develop explanations for the 
synthesis of materials resembling operationally extracted 
‘humic substances’, rather than to develop an understanding 
of the nature of all organic matter in soil. Over time, this attempt to mechanistically explain the formation of 
operationally defined ‘humic substances’ also led to their 
definition as synthesis products without the link to the alkaline extraction
5,6.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH62 | NATURE | VOL 528 | 3 D EcEmb ER  2015metals), and—particularly relevant for biogeochemical models—also 
inherently ‘stable’ against further decomposition12. The suite of hypothet -
ical transformation processes became collectively known as ‘humification’ 
and is also called the ‘synthesis concept of the genesis of humic substances’ 
or ‘secondary synthesis’12,15,23,24 (Fig. 2).
(2) ‘Selective preservation’ , which is also called preferential decom -
position25, is a newer concept informed by decomposition studies of 
leaves26,27 and visible plant fragments in soils28. This concept assumes 
that organic inputs are composed of both labile and relatively recalcitrant 
compounds29, the latter being used by microorganisms only when the 
former are exhausted. However, there is now robust evidence that, under 
suitable conditions, appropriately adapted decomposer organisms have 
the ability to decompose even presumably persistent materials more 
quickly than previously anticipated, including polycondensed aromat -
ics30, alkanes in soil31, fire-derived carbon32, crude oil in sea water33, 
and even polyethylene34. Also, contrary to previous assumptions35, the 
decomposition of presumably recalcitrant lignin is fastest at the early 
stages of decomposition, as long as it is easily accessible and small 
organic molecules are available as a source of energy to help mineralize 
the lignin36.(3) In the progressive decomposition model (also called ‘biopolymer 
degradation’37; or ‘the degradative concept’15,23), soil organic matter 
consists of a range of organic fragments and microbial products of all 
sizes at various stages of decomposition7,38 (Fig. 2). Several independ -
ent lines of evidence revealed alkali-extracted ‘humic substances’ to 
be a mixture of identifiable compounds such as fragments of plants 
or microorganisms39–41 that are distributed in different locations of  
micro-aggregates42–45, showing no similarity to the ‘humic’ extract42, and 
having small size46,47. Upon cell death, materials that are synthesized in 
the course of microbial anabolism are released into the soil, where they are 
subject to further degradation. Throughout this process, these materials 
remain on an energetic downhill trajectory48, as opposed to the hypo -
thetical ‘humic substances’ (Fig. 2), whose ‘secondary synthesis’ would 
require energy investments for which no thermodynamic rationale has 
been provided so far15.
Using recognized chemical, physical and biological controls on soil 
carbon turnover, the available evidence can reconcile those existing  
theories into a SCM (Fig. 2). In the SCM concept, organic matter exists 
as a continuum of organic fragments that are continuously processed by 
the decomposer community towards smaller molecular size7,20,21. The 
breakdown of large molecules leads to a decrease in the size of primary 
plant material with concurrent increases in polar and ionizable groups, 
and thus to increased solubility in water. At the same time, the oppor -
tunity for protection against further decomposition increases through 
greater reactivity towards mineral surfaces and incorporation into 
aggregates (Fig. 2). Modern analytical tools for the characterization of 
biomolecules in microbial cells and soils now suggest a direct and rapid 
contribution of microbial cell walls to soil organic matter protected by 
interaction with minerals49,50. Adsorption may be followed by desorption, 
exchange reactions with competing organic compounds, and biotic or 
abiotic degradation. An obvious consequence of microbial involvement 
in the decomposition process is the direct deposition of microbial cells, 
cell debris, exopolysaccharides, and root exudates on mineral surfaces.
Only the SCM explains the variations in turnover time of organic 
compounds through variations in the presence or absence of decom -
poser organisms and enzymes and the energy they require, through the 
properties and abundance of mineral surfaces that may protect organic 
matter, and through the availability of numerous other resources (such 
as oxygen and nutrients)51,52. The vast portfolio of options for variations 
in carbon turnover dynamics in the SCM provides a full explanation of 
organic matter properties as observed by contemporary, in situ  spectro -
microscopic techniques39–42 without invoking ‘humification’ processes or 
‘humic substances’ . Consequently, the SCM does not require microbial 
or abiotic generation of recalcitrance through the formation of specific 
organic compounds and is in agreement with the stated need to focus 
on spatial arrangement of soil organic matter53 and environmental con -
trol such as temperature, moisture or soil mineralogy52. Decomposition 
pathways, sequences and rates therefore evolve as a specific function of a 
given soil system. The SCM offers a way forward in modelling soil carbon 
dynamics and developing soil management that is based on observable 
evidence, as discussed below.
Environmental relevance
The SCM view of the nature of soil organic matter—which excludes 
any secondary synthesis of ‘humic substances’—has implications for a 
range of disciplines that build on the science of organic matter properties 
and changes in soil (Fig. 1). This is all the more important as the ‘humic  
substances’ concept is very widely adopted outside the soil sciences, with 
the majority of publications focusing on ‘humic substances’ published in 
journals that do not explicitly cover soil science.
Soil carbon modelling
Soils contain more organic carbon than the atmosphere and vegetation 
combined1 and predictions of soil organic matter dynamics could there-
fore greatly influence forecasts of global climate change. Major soil carbon 
models such as Century54 or RothC55 are built on the premise that soil Box 2
critique of the ‘humification’ model
A consolidated assessment of published evidence (Fig. 3) reveals 
that secondary synthesis of ‘humic substances’ facilitated by 
minerals or enzymes has not been shown to be relevant in 
natural systems. On these grounds we find it inadvisable to 
support the classic ‘humification’ model. Evidence based on 
isotopic labelling107 or on the testing of numerous decomposer 
organisms108 leaves little doubt that the supposedly recalcitrant 
‘humic substances’ can be decomposed at surprisingly 
fast rates. The dark colour of ‘humic’ extracts generated in 
laboratory experiments109,110 can be satisfactorily explained 
by a combination of two processes: the degradation of natural 
pigments and the accumulation of molecules containing random 
conjugated bonds (which appear dark in the mixture). Large 
molecular masses of hundreds to millions of daltons (mostly 
10,000–100,000 daltons) reported in early studies12 have more 
recently been found to consist of self-assembled aggregates of 
small compounds mimicking large molecules13,46,111. Contrary 
to many earlier interpretations, the old radiocarbon age of some alkaline extracts
112 is not a valid criterion for the persistence of 
decomposed organic matter, but merely an indication of when  
the carbon was fixed by photosynthesis113. The chemical 
structures of so-called polyaromatic carbon compounds (carbon in ring structures) often observed in the extracts are routinely 
produced by both plants and microorganisms and include 
melanins, tannins and antibiotics (polyketides)
114,115. However, 
these compounds have a clear physiological purpose and are therefore not the products of a random decomposition process. 
Ubiquitous thermally altered carbon from vegetation fires found 
in most soils
116–118 is also polyaromatic, and a portion of such 
compounds is typically extracted in alkaline solution83,119. 
Heterocyclic nitrogen (nitrogen embedded in a carbon ring structure) has been proposed to result from secondary synthesis, 
but evidence is only available to demonstrate its origin from 
fires
120 or from artefacts during analyses15,121. The glass transition 
sometimes observed in materials from alkaline extracts122 has 
been attributed to ‘humification’123, because glass transition 
behaviour requires a degree of molecular order. But the glass transition can also be found in many microbial products
124 and 
fire-altered organic matter125 (in which the processes are well  
established).
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH3 D EcEmb ER  2015 | VOL 528 | NATURE | 63organic matter can be divided into pools that have different turnover 
times. None of these models explicitly represents the characteristic pro -
cesses of carbon transformation detailed in the SCM, such as adsorption 
and protection, desorption, and microbial activity. Although carbon 
movement between pools and their decomposition rates are modified 
by temperature, texture and moisture, the default turnover rates asso -
ciated with individual carbon pools are justified by the combined influ -
ence of physical protection and an inferred resistance to decomposition  that is dependent on substrate quality (‘quality’ is here used in the sense 
of molecular composition of the organic matter). Particularly for the  
‘slow’ and ‘passive’ pools, this inherent resistance to decomposition  
(recalcitrance) has been understood to be the result of ‘humification’ , with 
the RothC model explicitly including ‘humus’ fractions55. Lack of mech -
anistic representation of the decomposition process produces disagree -
ment among models56 and between model predictions and observational 
data57,58.Figure 2 | Reconciliation of current conceptual models for the fate of 
organic debris into a consolidated view of a SCM of organic matter cycles and ecosystem controls in soil. Classic ‘humification’ relies on 
the synthesis of large molecules from decomposition products. Selective 
preservation assumes that some organic materials are preferentially mineralized, leaving intrinsically ‘stable’ decomposition products behind. Progressive decomposition reflects the concept of microbial processing of large plant biopolymers to smaller molecules. In the proposed SCM, a continuum of organic fragments is continuously processed by the 
decomposer community from large plant and animal residues towards smaller molecular size. At the same time, greater oxidation of the organic 
materials increases solubility in water as well as the opportunity for protection against further decomposition through greater reactivity 
towards mineral surfaces and incorporation into aggregates. Dashed 
arrow lines denote mainly abiotic transfer, solid lines denote mainly biotic transfer; thicker lines indicate more rapid rates; larger boxes and ends 
 
of wedges illustrate greater pool sizes; all differences are illustrative.  
All arrows represent processes that are a function of temperature, moisture and the biota present.(3) Progressive decompositionMolecular size    Molecular size
OxidationMonomers
(assimilable)Fauna
Exo-enzymes
(mainly bacteria)Fauna Exo-enzymesFauna
Exo-enzymes
(mainly fungi)‘Labile’
(carbohydrates, protein)‘Stable’
(lignin, lipid, pyrogenic)
‘Labile’ ‘Stable’
‘Stable’ ‘Labile’
Enzymes
Microbes Enzymes
Microbes
Microbes MicrobesLarge biopolymers
(not assimilable)Large biopolymers
(not assimilable)Large biopolymers
(not assimilable)
Small biopolymers
(assimilable)Small biopolymers
(assimilable)Small biopolymers,
monomers
(assimilable) 
Humic substances
(not assimilable)Plant, animal residuesPlant, animal residuesPlant, animal residues
Fauna Exo-enzymes
Microbes
Molecular size
Molecular sizeAromaticity, oxidation, complexityCompeting views 
(2) Selective preservation 
Large biopolymers
Small biopolymers
MonomersPlant, animal residuesCO2
CO2
CO2CO2
Turnover time    Turnover timeCarbohydrate, protein, lignin, lipid, pyrogenic
Not assimilable (>600 Da) 
Assimilable (<600 Da) Consolidated view 
Soil continuum model 
Formation
Formation
FormationDestruction
Destruction
Destruction
Formation
DestructionAdsorption
Desorption
Adsorption
Desorption
Adsorption
Desorption
Adsorption
DesorptionAggregates
Mineral surfacesExo-enzymesExo-enzymes
(mainly fungi)Exo-enzymes
(mainly bacteria )Exo-enzymes(1) ‘Humiﬁcation’
Monomers
(assimilable)
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH64 | NATURE | VOL 528 | 3 D EcEmb ER  2015The shortcomings become apparent when these models are applied 
to predict the global warming feedback of soil organic carbon miner -
alization. Rising temperatures increase microbial activity and a warm -
ing atmosphere may therefore lead to greater mineralization of soil organic carbon59. The resultant carbon dioxide emissions would then 
accelerate the greenhouse effect and thereby increase global temper -
ature. Soil organic matter pools with slower turnover are thought to 
respond more sensitively to climate warming than those with fast turn-
over59–61. The underlying, so-called carbon–quality–temperature theory  
(CQT theory62) combines classical ‘humification’ theory, that is, the 
assumption that decomposition creates complex, recalcitrant compounds, 
with the Arrhenius theory that chemical reactions are faster at higher tem -
peratures63. According to CQT theory, the decomposition of a complex 
substrate requires more enzymatic reactions and a higher total activation 
energy than a reaction metabolizing a simple carbon substrate, and as a 
result, would be more sensitive to rising temperatures than the decom -
position of a simple carbon substrate. The CQT theory loses much of 
its explanatory potential for the carbon pools with slow turnover if the 
decomposition of organic matter is not creating complex and recalcitrant 
compounds.
Different organic compounds entering the soil have highly varying 
composition64 and in isolation (for example, fresh litter) have differ -
ent turnover and hence temperature responses as a function of their  
composition60. However, this variation is so heavily influenced by  
environmental and biotic factors after they enter the soil ecosystem that 
the concept of relying on quality-dependent temperature responses is, in 
our opinion, obsolete. We propose that future research should concentrate 
to a much greater extent on the causes of any observed substrate prefer -
ences, such as the absence of a decomposer with a matching catabolic 
toolbox or the lack of a critical resource for the decomposer.
To equip models with more appropriate temperature responses, new 
approaches need to recognize first the continuum of organic compounds 
(rather than discreet pools with different turnover times), and second 
the protection of organic compounds (rather than substrate quality). It 
is not obvious that merely distinguishing between the mineralization 
of plant litter on the one hand and degradation products interacting 
with the mineral matrix65 on the other will generate better predictive 
capabilities, simply because they form a continuum. In addition, the full suite of controls on mineralization must be considered, notably 
 
temperature–moisture interactions66. Mechanistic understanding in 
this field will be greatly improved if ‘humification’-derived assumptions 
about the molecular structure of the slower-cycling soil carbon pools are 
replaced by considerations of the processes that render organic decom -
position fragments mobile in soil solution. The relevance of binding 
mechanisms of organic substances to different mineral surfaces is still 
uncertain67 and the stability of minerals themselves may change as a result 
of exposure to organic compounds, such as those released by roots68.
The laudable efforts to include microbial activity69 and diversity70 into 
soil carbon models to improve climate predictions continue to focus on the 
quality of organic matter. The development of models built on microbial  
ecology should omit any emphasis on substrate quality and especially 
the proposed large ‘humified’ organic compounds. Observations in soils 
depleted of plant litter input showed microbial communities adapted to 
metabolizing simple, small compounds rather than the large and poly -
meric organic compounds expected for old and persistent soil organic  
carbon71. To predict the responses of soil organic carbon to climate warm -
ing, models must move beyond conceptual pools having different turn-
over times and instead combine soil physical principles into soil biological 
processes. As recently demonstrated72, aspects of this combination are 
already possible when models include the extent to which the mobility 
of organic fragments in soil water affects accessibility of decomposition 
products by functionally different groups of microorganisms.
It will next be critical to develop models that provide deeper insight 
into microbial access to soil organic carbon by including the spatial 
architecture of the soil53. Such model development benefits from spatial 
data, which are becoming available using imaging analyses in two42,49 or 
three dimensions73. In a fully developed model, this will require extensive 
computing capabilities and may only be possible if this research is priorit-
ized or at a time when further computational advances make complex 
spatial calculations easily accessible and inexpensive. Combining these Figure 3 | Weighing up the empirical information supporting either the 
historic or evidence-based interpretation of the nature of soil organic matter. A consolidated assessment of scientific evidence published over 
the past two decades provides explanations for the properties of alkaline extracts that do not require invoking the secondary synthesis of ‘humic substances’ .Old age of carbon in alkaline extracts compared to whole soil 
Greater aromaticity compared to whole soil 
More nitrogen heterocycles  compared to whole soil Properties of alkaline extracts: Dark colour
Random mix of small
molecules containing 
conjugated bonds as a 
residue; degradation of pigments 
Glass transition behaviour (a phase change requiring some 
level of molecular order) Large size and mass not
corroborated; self-assembly 
of small molecules 
Radiocarbon age is not a valid
criterion for persistence of a 
decomposition product 
Not all alkaline extracts are
enriched in aromatics; pyrogenic 
carbon and microbial metabolites 
(not waste products) create 
aromatic-rich alkaline extracts 
Analytical artefacts during
quanti/f_ication; pyrogenic 
nitrogen is heterocyclic and 
alkali extractable 
Common for some known
biomolecules and 
pyrogenic carbon Secondary synthesis of
various conjugated bonds 
in large molecules that
appear dark 
Synthesis of complex
‘humic substances’ 
‘Humic substances’ are
recalcitrant because they 
contain carbon with old 
radiocarbon ages 
‘Humi/f_ication’ creates
polyaromatic molecules 
Heterocyclic nitrogen is a
product of proposed 
‘humi/f_ication’ reactions 
Formation of large polymersHistoric
interpretation 
Evidence-based
interpretation
Apparent large size and mass of molecules 
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH3 D EcEmb ER  2015 | VOL 528 | NATURE | 65approaches within the SCM would provide opportunities to test whether 
the distance of microorganisms from the organic matter plays as impor -
tant a part as does the attachment of organic matter to protective mineral 
surfaces, which constitutes the next frontier in better understanding and 
prediction of soil organic carbon dynamics.
Aquatic systems
Because soil organic matter is a major source of organic carbon in rivers, 
lakes and estuaries3, its persistence and retention is of great interest for 
closing global carbon budgets1. Large proportions of organic carbon in 
rivers are mineralized and emitted as carbon dioxide74 or retained in  
fluvial75 and oceanic sediments76. To date, ‘humic substances’ as extracted 
by alkali constitute the organic workhorse that is investigated by the com -
munity of aquatic chemists. Continuing this practice of investigating 
organic matter in aquatic systems with the help of an inadequate proxy 
will not only prevent us from obtaining a better understanding of how far 
organic matter is transported and when it outgasses into the atmosphere, 
it will also generate misleading conclusions about is stability and reactiv -
ity3. As outlined above for the soil environment, we argue that the persis -
tence and movement of terrestrially derived organic carbon compounds 
entering aquatic ecosystems will rely on their protection by minerals, 
solubility in water and microbial degradation rather than primarily their 
chemical properties.
Aquatic carbon is not only important as part of the global carbon cycle, 
but also for local biogeochemical processes in streams and lakes. The 
observation of electron shuttling by ‘humic substances’ may serve as an 
example77–79. Electron shuttling is often attributed to quinones80 and is a 
key driver for the microbial use of organic carbon, including organic pol -
lutants and oxidation of reduced metals in oxygen-limited environments 
such as aquatic sediments and peatlands81. Extracts of ‘humic substances’ 
typically used for investigations of electron shuttling phenomena may 
have developed this capacity not as a result of ‘humification’ , but because 
alkaline solutions extract quinones that are present in soil as a result of 
known microbial metabolism82 or in carbon thermally altered by fire83, 
which has been shown to be electrochemically active84,85. Abandoning the 
‘humic’ proxy will broaden future research to include electron transfer 
mediated by organic matter that is not soluble in alkali. This will improve 
identification of mechanisms controlling methane production in tem-
porarily anoxic environments79 and those elements of biotic85 and abi -
otic86 iron cycles that remain elusive.
Water treatment is a vital technology, but its mechanistic basis is ren -
dered questionable by the pervasive use of the ‘humic substances’ proxy. 
Anaerobic bioremediation refers to ‘humic substances’ as an electron 
acceptor78 that removes pollutants. During purification of drinking 
water, on the other hand, ‘humic acids’ are considered contaminants, 
because reactions with disinfectants generate by-products that are toxic to 
humans87. Research specifically targets ‘humic’ isolates that are perceived 
to be relevant proxies for organic compounds in waste water88. Instead, 
water treatment would benefit from using organic materials that are based 
on mixtures of actually existing degradation products rather than the 
proxies based on alkaline extraction, as in the removal of organic mat -
ter by coagulation87. Water treatment needs to become more predictable 
because future contamination will inevitably include new pharmaceuti -
cals or nanoparticles of which we have limited experience.
Agriculture
Productive soils are central to human welfare because agriculture gener -
ates most of our food, feed and fibre. Organic matter contributes to soil 
fertility by retaining plant-available water and nutrients or promoting 
the formation of soil structure, but it is also consumed in the process of 
arable soil management as it releases needed nutrients and energy when 
it decomposes89. However, proposals to return the carbon lost through 
agricultural activities in previous decades often emphasize the need to 
build or augment a ‘stable humus’ pool, drawing on the outdated con -
cept of ‘humification’ . Such a pool has been suggested to increase soil 
organic matter resistance to decomposition through in situ  synthesis of macromolecules90 or hydrophobic protection by ‘humic substances’91. 
However, this goal seems counterproductive given that soil organic mat -
ter is most beneficial when it decays and releases energy and nutrients89. 
Acknowledging the dynamic continuum of decomposition products suggests that the management of soil organic matter turnover is more 
important than the accrual of non-productive organic matter deposits. 
This requires a mechanistic understanding of interactions with minerals, 
movement into areas of lower mineralization and mediation of microbial 
activity7. The need to manage the turnover and volume of organic com-
pounds and nutrient provisioning to optimize soil productivity (Fig. 1) 
warrants further research into balancing both stocks and flows of organic 
matter.
Soil organic matter can reduce contaminant uptake into crops and 
leaching into groundwater through adsorption at the cost of long-term 
accumulation. Studying the hypothetical interactions of heavy metals or 
other pollutants with extracts of ‘humic substances’ will provide limited 
insight into contaminant behaviour. Future research into interactions of 
organic matter with arsenic92, other heavy metals93 or pharmaceuticals94 
will generate more robust information by investigating the entire soil 
organic matter or the portion present in soil solution rather than what 
is extractable by alkali. This will allow better predictions of contaminant 
movement and mitigation of their environmental impact by adsorption 
and microbial use.
Alkaline extraction targets materials with abundant functional groups. 
Consequently, plant growth is often enhanced when such materials are 
added to soils particularly to stimulate rooting95. Alkali-extracted prod-
ucts are therefore becoming increasingly popular as soil amendments96. 
Better crop nutrition is an important part of this strategy and plant uptake 
of micronutrients is indeed known to be improved when organic com -
pounds make them more soluble97. Positive plant responses to ‘humic 
substances’ resembling those of beneficial plant hormones95, through 
improved defence mechanisms against pests or diseases98 and changes 
in gene expression99 may mean that the alkaline extracts contain com -
pounds that trigger these effects. If we acknowledge soil organic matter as 
a continuum of decomposition products, we will be better able to design 
soil applications for specific purposes such as improved plant defence, and 
unpack what is essentially a ‘black box’ of compounds extracted by alkali. 
Research and product development should therefore focus on organic 
compounds that are soluble in water for managing soil health and focus 
on relationships between specific functional groups or compounds and 
positive plant responses for which information already exists.
The way forward
The need for the soil sciences to move away from both the ‘humifica -
tion’ model and associated ‘humic’ language has been much debated. 
Unfortunately, this objective has not been implemented with rigour and 
has largely been ignored in the neighbouring fields of aquatic and envi -
ronmental sciences. In many cases, the ‘humification’ model itself has 
been abandoned, but the ‘humic’ nomenclature is maintained. For exam -
ple, the large molecular size of ‘humic substances’ has been refuted13,100 
but not their existence. The issue has also been approached by redefining 
‘humic substances’ as the portion of soil organic matter that cannot be 
molecularly characterized20,101,102, or by calling all soil organic matter 
‘humus’11. We argue that this compromise—maintaining terminology 
but altering its meanings in varying ways—hampers scientific progress 
beyond the soil sciences. The SCM of soil organic matter does not allow 
a confusing middle path; it requires leaving the traditional view behind to 
bring about lasting innovation and progress103. This is critical as scientific 
fields outside the soil sciences base their research on the false premise of 
the existence of ‘humic substances’ . Thus an issue of terminology becomes 
a problem of false inference, with far-reaching implications beyond  
our ability to communicate scientifically accurate soil processes and 
properties.
Reconciliation of modern experimental evidence with a robust 
molecular model can immediately be achieved by consistently referring 
to ‘humic substances’ as alkaline extracts rather than suggesting that 
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH66 | NATURE | VOL 528 | 3 D EcEmb ER  2015a distinct category of organic materials exists. This is essential when 
modelling global soil carbon, for which we need to cease using soil 
carbon pools whose definitions are rooted in ‘humic’ theory. In future 
research, alkaline extracts should not be used as proxies for naturally 
occurring organic matter or a subset thereof. Alkaline extraction should 
be supplanted by approaches that capture actual solubility in soil, river 
or ocean water.
The SCM will direct fundamental research questions towards  
microbial access to ‘protected’ rather than ‘stable’ carbon, and this will 
lead to more mechanistic representations of pollutant mobility and elec-
tron transfer reactions. In applied science and industry, this shift will prove more difficult to establish, because commercial ‘humification’ 
products and their marketing are strongly established, particularly in 
the gardening and compost industry. However, alkaline extraction does 
indeed isolate organic materials rich in oxygen, which may have value for 
product development. Therefore, we urgently need a biologically based 
explanation of the established growth-promoting effects of some highly 
oxidized organic compounds in soil in order to develop commercial prod -
ucts that operate in a predictable manner based on observable reactions 
of enzymes, hormones or cell wall transport. This will redirect existing 
research and development programmes at the intersection of molecular 
biology, ecology and soil biogeochemistry to allow the implementation 
of scientifically sound ‘soil health’ concepts.
Government-funded research programmes must therefore preferen-
tially support science that bridges the gap between detailed and fine-
scale mechanistic research at the plant–soil interface and field-scale 
research relevant to those who manage soils for their multiple ecosystem 
services. There are great opportunities for progress in explaining soil 
carbon responses to warming, and in the improvement of soil fertility 
and water quality. Coordinated interdisciplinary research programmes 
should be urgently set up to encourage greater coordination between soil 
biogeochemists and modellers. Such programmes should use the SCM to 
examine the balance between managing carbon and nutrient flows with sequestration, and between carbon transport, deposition and evasion in 
rivers and oceans. Models based on pools should be replaced with models 
based on organic matter solubility and spatial architecture to improve 
climate prediction, regional and global assessments of soil resources and 
soil vulnerability. The reward will be more robust forecasts and resource 
evaluation, issues critical for developing future climate change and land 
use policies.
received 30 April 2015; accepted 8 October 2015. 
Published online 23 November 2015.
1. Ciais, P. et al. in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis (eds Stocker, 
T. F. et al.) 465–570 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2013).
2. Lal, R. Soil carbon sequestration impacts on global climate change and food security. Science 304, 1623–1627 (2004).
3. Marín-Spiotta, E. et al. Paradigm shifts in soil organic matter research affect interpretations of aquatic carbon cycling: transcending disciplinary and 
ecosystem boundaries. Biogeochemistry 117, 279–297 (2014).
4. Brady, N. C. & Weil, R. R. The Nature and Properties of Soils 14th edn, Ch. 12 
(Prentice Hall, 2008).
5. Tan, K. H. Humic Matter in Soil and the Environment: Principles and Controversies  
2nd edn (CRC Press, 2014).
6. Horwath, W. R. in Soil Microbiology, Ecology, and Biochemistry 4th edn 
 
(ed. Paul, E.) 339–382 (Academic Press, 2015).
7. Trumbore, S. E. Potential responses of soil organic carbon to global 
environmental change. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 8284–8291 (1997).
8. Schnitzer, M. & Monreal, C. M. Quo Vadis soil organic matter research?  
A biological link to the chemistry of humification. Adv. Agron. 113,  
143–217 (2011).
9. Achard, F. K. Chemische Untersuchung des Torfs. Chem. Ann. Freunde Naturlehre, Arzneigel. Haushalt. Manufact. 2, 391–403 (1786).
10. van Bemmelen, J. M. Die Absorptionsverbindungen und das 
Absorptionsvermögen der Ackererde. Landwirtschaftlichen Versuchs-Stationen  
35, 69–136 (1888).
11. Waksman, S. A. Humus. Origin, Chemical Composition and Importance in Nature (Williams and Wilkins, 1936). 
 
This is the first major critique of the humification concept.
12. Stevenson, F. J. Humus Chemistry: Genesis, Composition, Reactions   
(John Wiley & Sons, 1994).13. Sutton, R. & Sposito, G. Molecular structure in soil humic substances: the new view. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39, 9009–9015 (2005).
14. Stumm, W. & Morgan, J. J. Aquatic Chemistry, An Introduction Emphasizing Chemical Equilibria in Natural Waters (Wiley, 1981).
15. Burdon, J. Are the traditional concepts of the structures of humic substances realistic? Soil Sci. 166, 752–769 (2001).
16. Jenkinson, D. S. & Rayner, J. H. The turnover of soil organic matter in some of the Rothamsted classical experiments. Soil Sci. 123, 298–305 (1977).
17. Weiss, M. S. et al. Molecular architecture and electrostatic properties of a 
bacterial porin. Science 254, 1627–1630 (1991).
18. Hedges, J. I. & Oades, J. M. Comparative organic geochemistries of soils and 
marine sediments. Org. Geochem. 27, 319–361 (1997).
19. Baldock, J. A. & Nelson, P. N. in Handbook of Soil Science (ed. Sumner, M. E.) 
B25–B84 (CRC Press, 2000).
20. Essington, M. E. Soil and Water Chemistry: An Integrated Approach (CRC Press, 
2004).
21. Bosatta, E. & Agren, G. I. Dynamics of carbon and nitrogen in the organic-matter of the soil—a generic theory. Am. Nat. 138, 227–245 (1991).
22. Kononova, M. M. Soil Organic Matter. Its Nature, its Role in Soil Formation and in Soil Fertility (Pergamon, 1961).
23. Hayes, M. H. B. & Swift, R. S. in Soil Colloids and their Associations in Aggregates  
(eds De Boodt, M. F., Hayes, M. H. B. & Herbillon, A.) 245–305 (Plenum, 
 
1990).
24. Guggenberger, G. in Microorganisms in Soils: Roles in Genesis and Functions  
(eds Buscot, F. & Varma, A.) 85–106 (Springer, 2005).
25. Sollins, P., Homann, P. & Caldwell, B. A. Stabilization and destabilization of soil organic matter: mechanisms and controls. Geoderma 74, 65–105 (1996).
26. Melillo, J. M., Aber, J. D. & Muratore, J. F. Nitrogen and lignin control of 
hardwood leaf litter decomposition dynamics. Ecology 63, 621–626 (1982).
27. Aber, J. D., Melillo, J. M. & McClaugherty, C. A. Predicting long-term patterns of 
mass-loss, nitrogen dynamics, and soil organic matter formation from initial 
litter chemistry in temperate forest ecosystems. Can. J. Bot. 68, 2201–2208 
(1990).
28. Baldock, J. A. et al. Aspects of the chemical structure of soil organic materials 
as revealed by solid-state 
13C NMR spectroscopy. Biogeochemistry 16, 1–42 
(1992).
29. Lützow, M. V. et al. Stabilization of organic matter in temperate soils: mechanisms and their relevance under different soil conditions—a review. 
 
Eur. J. Soil Sci. 57, 426–445 (2006).
30. Gramss, G., Voigt, K. D. & Kirsche, B. Degradation of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons with three to seven aromatic rings by higher fungi in sterile and 
unsterile soils. Biodegradation 10, 51–62 (1999).
31. Wiesenberg, G. L. B., Schwarzbauer, J., Schmidt, M. W. I. & Schwark, L. Source and turnover of organic matter in agricultural soils derived from 
n-alkane/n -carboxylic acid compositions and C-isotope signatures. Org. 
Geochem. 35, 1371–1393 (2004).
32. Hamer, U., Marschner, B., Brodowski, S. & Amelung, W. Interactive priming of black carbon and glucose mineralisation. Org. Geochem. 35, 823–830 
(2004).
33. Hazen, T. C. et al. Deep-sea oil plume enriches indigenous oil-degrading 
bacteria. Science 330, 204–208 (2010).
34. Yang, J., Yang, Y., Wu, W.-M., Zhao, J. & Jiang, L. Evidence of polyethylene biodegradation by bacterial strains from the guts of plastic-eating waxworms. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 13776–13784 (2014). 
 
These experiments show that under certain conditions bacteria can even utilize plastics, not thought to be biologically degradable.
35. Berg, B. & Staaf, H. Decomposition rate and chemical changes of Scots pine needle litter. II. Influence of chemical composition. Ecol. Bull. 32, 373–390 
(1980).
36. Klotzbücher, T., Kaiser, K., Guggenberger, G., Gatzek, C. & Kalbitz, K. A new 
conceptual model for the fate of lignin in decomposing plant litter. Ecology 92, 
1052–1062 (2011). 
 
This paper shows that lignin in plant litter can be easily mineralized by 
microorganisms provided that bioavailable carbon is present.
37. Hedges, J. I. in Humic Substances and their Role in the Environment (eds 
Frimmel, F. H. & Christman, R. F.) 45–58 (John Wiley & Sons, 1988).
38. Cotrufo, M. F., Wallenstein, M. D., Boot, C. M., Denef, K. & Paul, E. The Microbial Efficiency-Matrix Stabilization (MEMS) framework integrates plant litter 
decomposition with soil organic matter stabilization: do labile plant inputs 
form stable soil organic matter? Glob. Change Biol. 19, 988–995 (2013). 
 
This paper discusses the need to integrate concepts of litter decomposition with protection and mineralization of soil organic matter, and proposes a 
solution.
39. Kelleher, B. P. & Simpson, A. J. Humic substances in soils: are they really 
chemically distinct? Environ. Sci. Technol. 40, 4605–4611 (2006). 
 
This paper provides direct proof that the chemical makeup of ‘humic substances’ can be explained as resulting from mixtures of known plant and 
microbial compounds.
40. Gillespie, A. et al. Glomalin-related soil protein contains non-mycorrhizal-
related heat-stable proteins, lipids and humic materials. Soil Biol. Biochem. 43, 
766–777 (2011).
41. Mylotte, R. et al. Isolation and characterisation of recalcitrant organic components from an estuarine sediment core. J. Soils Sedim. 15, 211–224 
(2015).
42. Lehmann, J. et al. Spatial complexity of soil organic matter forms at nanometre scales. Nature Geosci. 1, 238–242 (2008). 
 
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH3 D EcEmb ER  2015 | VOL 528 | NATURE | 67This paper demonstrates that spectral properties of alkaline extracts are not 
found in soils at a high spatial resolution.
43. Schumacher, M., Christl, I., Scheinost, A. C., Jacobsen, C. & Kretzschmer, R. Chemical heterogeneity of organic soil colloids investigated by scanning transmission X-ray microscopy and C-1s NEXAFS spectroscopy. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39, 9094–9100 (2005).
44. Lehmann, J., Kinyangi, J. & Solomon, D. Organic matter stabilization in soil microaggregates: implications from spatial heterogeneity of organic carbon contents and carbon forms. Biogeochemistry 85, 45–57 (2007).
45. Chen, C., Dynes, J. J., Wang, J., Karunakaran, C. & Sparks, D. L. Soft X-ray spectromicroscopy study of mineral-organic matter associations in pasture soil clay fractions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 6678–6686 (2014).
46. Myneni, S. C. B., Brown, J. T., Martinez, G. A. & Meyer-Ilsel, W. Imaging of humic 
substance macromolecular structures in water and soils. Science 286, 
1335–1337 (1999). 
 
This paper provides spectroscopic evidence that organic materials in 
alkaline extracts are assemblages of smaller compounds mimicking larger 
molecules.
47. Nebbioso, A. & Piccolo, A. Advances in humeomics: enhanced structural 
identification of humic molecules after size fractionation of a soil humic acid. Anal. Chim. Acta 720, 77–90 (2012).
48. Hedges, J. I. et al. The molecularly-uncharacterized component of nonliving organic matter in natural environments. Org. Geochem. 31, 945–958 
(2000).
49. Miltner, A., Bombach, P., Schmidt-Brücken, B. & Kästner, M. SOM genesis: microbial biomass as a significant source. Biogeochemistry 111, 41–55 
(2012).
50. Schurig, C. et al. Microbial cell-envelope fragments and the formation of soil 
organic matter: a case study from a glacier forefield. Biogeochemistry 113, 
595–612 (2013).
51. Hedges, J. I. & Keil, R. G. Organic geochemical perspectives on estuarine processes: sorption reactions and consequences. Mar. Chem. 65, 55–65 
(1999).
52. Schmidt, M. W. I. et al. Persistence of soil organic matter as an ecosystem 
property. Nature 478, 49–56 (2011).
53. Stockmann, U. et al. The knowns, known unknowns and unknowns of sequestration of soil organic carbon. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 164, 80–99 
(2013).
54. Parton, W. J. et al. ForCent model development and testing using the Enriched Background Isotope Study experiment. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci. 115, 
 
G4 (2010).
55. Jenkinson, D. S. & Coleman, K. The turnover of organic carbon in subsoils.  
Part 2. Modelling carbon turnover. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 59, 400–413 (2008).
56. Todd-Brown, K. E. O. et al. Causes of variation in soil carbon simulations from 
CMIP5 Earth system models and comparison with observations. 
Biogeoscience 10, 1717–1736 (2013).
57. Bonan, G. B., Hartman, M. D., Parton, W. J. & Wieder, W. R. Evaluating litter decomposition in earth system models with long-term litterbag experiments: 
an example using the Community Land Model version 4 (CLM4). Glob. Change 
Biol. 19, 957–974 (2013).
58. Koven, C. D. et al. The effect of vertically resolved soil biogeochemistry and 
alternate soil C and N models on C dynamics of CLM4. Biogeoscience 10, 
7109–7131 (2013).
59. Davidson, E. A. & Janssens, I. A. Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon 
decomposition and feedbacks to climate change. Nature 440, 165–173 
 
(2006).
60. Conant, R. T. et al. Sensitivity of organic matter decomposition to warming 
varies with its quality. Glob. Change Biol. 14, 868–877 (2008).
61. Craine, J. M., Fierer, N. & McLauchlan, K. K. Widespread coupling between the 
rate and temperature sensitivity of organic matter decay. Nature Geosci. 3, 
854–857 (2010).
62. Bosatta, E. & Agren, G. I. Soil organic matter quality interpreted thermodynamically. Soil Biol. Biochem. 31, 1889–1891 (1999).
63. Arrhenius, S. Über die Reaktionsgeschwindigkeit bei der Inversion von 
Rohrzucker durch Säuren. Z. Phys. Chem. 4, 226–248 (1889).
64. Kögel-Knabner, I. The macromolecular organic composition of plant and 
microbial residues as inputs to soil organic matter. Soil Biol. Biochem. 34, 
139–162 (2002).
65. Erhagen, B. et al. Temperature response of litter and soil organic matter decomposition is determined by chemical composition of organic material. Glob. Change Biol. 19, 3858–3871 (2013).
66. Sierra, C. A., Trumbore, S. E., Davidson, E. A., Vicca, S. & Janssens, I. Sensitivity 0of decomposition rates of soil organic matter with respect to simultaneous changes in temperature and moisture. J. Adv. Modeling Earth Syst. 7, 335–356 
(2015).
67. Kleber, M. et al. Mineral–organic associations: formation, properties, and relevance in soil environments. Adv. Agron. 130, 1–140 (2015). 
 
This is a comprehensive discussion of the role of the mineral matrix in controlling organic matter transformations and persistence.
68. Keiluweit, M. et al. Mineral protection of soil carbon counteracted by root exudates. Nature Clim. Change 5, 588–595 (2015).
69. Todd-Brown, K. E., Hopkins, F. M., Kivlin, S. N., Talbot, J. M. & Allison, S. D. 
 
A framework for representing microbial decomposition in coupled climate models. Biogeochemistry 109, 19–33 (2012).
70. Treseder, K. K. et al. Integrating microbial ecology into ecosystem models: challenges and priorities. Biogeochemistry 109, 7–18 (2012).71. Nunan, N. et al. Metabolising old soil carbon: simply a matter of simple organic matter? Soil Biol. Biochem. 88, 128–136 (2015).
72. Riley, W. J. et al. Long residence times of rapidly decomposable soil organic matter: application of a multi-phase, multi-component, and vertically resolved 
model (BAMS1) to soil carbon dynamics. Geosci. Model Dev. 7, 1335–1355 
(2014).
73. Dal Ferro, N. & Morari, F. From real soils to 3D-printed soils: reproduction of complex pore network at the real size in a silty-loam soil. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 
79, 1008–1017 (2015).
74. Richey, J. E. et al. Outgassing from the Amazonian rivers and wetlands as a 
large tropical source of atmospheric CO
2. Nature 416, 617–620 (2002).
75. Cole, J. J. et al. Plumbing the global carbon cycle: integrating inlands 
waters into the terrestrial carbon budget. Ecosystems 10, 172–185  
(2007).
76. Hedges, J. I. & Keil, R. G. Sedimentary organic matter preservation: an assessment and speculative synthesis. Mar. Chem. 49, 81–115 (1995).
77. Lovley, D. R., Coates, J. D., Blunt-Harris, E. L., Phillips, E. J. & Woodward, J. C. 
Humic substances as electron acceptors for microbial respiration. Nature 382, 
445–448 (1996).
78. Martinez, C. M., Alvarez, L. H., Celis, L. B. & Cervantes, F. J. Humus-reducing microorganisms and their valuable contribution in environmental processes. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97, 10293–10308 (2013).
79. Klüpfel, L., Piepenbrock, A., Kappler, A. & Sander, M. Humic substances as fully regenerable electron acceptors in recurrently anoxic environments. Nature Geosci. 7, 195–200 (2014).
80. Uchimiya, M. & Stone, A. T. Reduction of substituted p -benzoquinones by Fe
II 
near neutral pH. Aquat. Geochem. 16, 173–188 (2010).
81. Keller, J. K. & Takagi, K. K. Solid-phase organic matter reduction regulates anaerobic decomposition in bog soils. Ecosphere 4, 54 (2013).
82. Newman, D. K. & Kolter, R. A role for excreted quinones in extracellular electron transfer. Nature 405, 94–97 (2001).
83. Solomon, D. et al. Molecular signature and sources of biochemical recalcitrance of organic C in Amazonian Dark Earths. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 71, 2285–2298 (2007).
84. Klüpfel, L., Keiluweit, M., Kleber, M. & Sander, M. Redox properties of plant biomass-derived black carbon (biochar). Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 5601–5611 
(2014).
85. Kappler, A. et al. Biochar as an electron shuttle between bacteria and Fe(III) 
minerals. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 1, 339–344 (2014).
86. Melton, E. D., Swanner, E. D., Behrens, S., Schmidt, C. & Kappler, A. The 
interplay of microbially mediated and abiotic reactions in the biogeochemical 
Fe cycle. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 12, 797–808 (2014).
87. 
Wang, W. et al. Effects of UV radiation on humic acid coagulation 
characteristics in drinking water treatment processes. Chem. Eng. J. 256, 
137–143 (2014).
88. Richardson, S. D. & Postigo, C. in Emerging Organic Contaminants and Human Health (ed. Barceló, D.) 93–137 (Springer, 2012).
89. Janzen, H. H. Beyond carbon sequestration: soil as conduit of solar energy. 
Eur. J. Soil Sci. 66, 19–32 (2015).
90. Lorenz, K., Lal, R., Preston, C. M. & Nierop, K. G. J. Strengthening the soil 
organic carbon pool by increasing contributions from recalcitrant aliphatic 
bio(macro)molecules. Geoderma 142, 1–10 (2007).
91. Spaccini, R., Piccolo, A., Conte, P., Haberhauer, G. & Gerzabek, M. H. Increased 
soil organic carbon sequestration through hydrophobic protection by humic substances. Soil Biol. Biochem. 34, 1839–1851 (2002).
92. Fakour, H. & Lin, T. F. Experimental determination and modeling of arsenic complexation with humic and fulvic acids. J. Hazard. Mater. 279, 569–578 
(2014).
93. Tang, W. W. et al. Impact of humic/fulvic acid on the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solutions using nanomaterials: a review. Sci. Total Environ.  
468–469, 1014–1027 (2014).
94. Aristilde, L. & Sposito, G. Complexes of the antimicrobial ciprofloxacin with 
soil, peat, and aquatic humic substances. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 32, 
1467–1478 (2013).
95. Calvo, P., Nelson, L. & Kloepper, J. W. Agricultural uses of plant biostimulants. Plant Soil 383, 3–41 (2014).
96. Rose, M. T. et al. A meta-analysis and review of plant-growth response to humic 
substances: practical implications for agriculture. Adv. Agron. 124, 37–89 
(2014).
97. Bocanegra, M. P., Lobartini, J. C. & Orioli, G. A. Plant uptake of iron chelated by humic acids of different molecular weights. Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal. 37, 
239–248 (2006).
98. Berbara, R. L. L. & García, A. C. in Physiological Mechanisms and Adaptation Strategies in Plants under Changing Environment (eds Ahmad, P. & Wani, M. R.) 297–319 (Springer, 2014).
99. Trevisan, S. et al. Humic substances affect Arabidopsis physiology by altering 
the expression of genes involved in primary metabolism, growth and 
development. Environ. Exp. Bot. 74, 45–55 (2011).
100. Wershaw, R. L. Evaluation of Conceptual Models of Natural Organic Matter 
(Humus) From a Consideration of the Chemical and Biochemical Processes of 
Humification. US Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2004–5121, http://pubs.usgs.gov/sir/2004/5121/pdf/sir2004-5121.pdf (USGS, 2004).
101. Baldock, J. A. & Broos, K. in Handbook of Soil Sciences: Resource Management and Environmental Impacts (eds Huang, P. M., Li, Y. & Sumner, M. E.) 11-1–52 (CRC Press, 2011).
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
PersPective reseArcH68 | NATURE | VOL 528 | 3 D EcEmb ER  2015102. Hatcher, P. G. The CHNs of organic geochemistry: characterization of 
molecularly uncharacterized non-living organic matter. Mar. Chem. 92,  
5–8 (2004).
103. Kuhn, T. S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago Press, 1962).
104. Forbes, M. S., Raison, R. J. & Skjemstad, J. O. Formation, transformation and transport of black carbon (charcoal) in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. 
 
Sci. Total Environ. 370, 190–206 (2006).
105. International Humic Substances Society (IHSS). What are Humic Substances?  
http://www.humicsubstances.org/whatarehs.html (IHSS, 2015).
106. Rice, J. A. Humin. Soil Sci. 166, 848–857 (2001).
107. Tatzber, M. et al. Decomposition of carbon-14-labeled organic amendments and humic acids in a long-term field experiment. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 73, 
744–750 (2009).
108. Gramss, G., Ziegenhagen, D. & Sorge, S. Degradation of soil humic extract by wood- and soil-associated fungi, bacteria, and commercial enzymes. Microb. 
Ecol. 37, 140–151 (1999). 
 
This paper provides experimental evidence for rapid metabolization of ‘humic extracts’ by a selection of soil fungi.
109. Maillard, L. C. Synthèse des matières humiques par action des acides aminés sur les sucres réducteurs. Ann. Chimie 5, 258–317 (1916).
110. Huang, P. M. & Hardie, A. G. in Biophysico-Chemical Processes Involving 
 
Natural Nonliving Organic Matter in Environmental Systems (eds Senesi, N.,  
Xing, B. & Huang, P. M.) 41–109 (John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
111. Piccolo, A. The supramolecular structure of humic substances. Soil Sci. 166, 
810–832 (2001).
112. Campbell, C. A., Paul, E. A., Rennie, D. A. & McCallum, K. J. Applicability of the carbon-dating method of analysis to soil humus studies. Soil Sci. 104, 
217–224 (1967).
113. Gleixner, G. Soil organic matter dynamics: a biological perspective derived from the use of compound-specific isotopes studies. Ecol. Res. 28, 683–695 
(2013).
114. Chen, J., Henderson, G., Grimm, C. C., Lloyd, S. W. & Laine, R. A. Termites fumigate their nests with naphthalene. Nature 392, 558–559 (1998).
115. Staunton, J. & Weissmann, K. J. Polyketide biosynthesis: a millennium review. Nat. Prod. Rep. 18, 380–416 (2001).116. Skjemstad, J. O., Clarke, P., Taylor, J. A., Oades, J. M. & McClure, S. G. 
 
The chemistry and nature of protected carbon in soil. Aust. J. Soil Res. 34, 
251–271 (1996).
117. Lehmann, J. et al. Australian climate–carbon cycle feedback reduced by soil black carbon. Nature Geosci. 1, 832–835 (2008).
118. Rodionov, A. et al. Black carbon in grassland ecosystems of the world. 
 
Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 24, GB3013 (2010).
119. Heymann, K. et al. Can functional group composition of alkaline isolates from 
black carbon-rich soils be identified on a sub-100 nm scale? Geoderma  
235–236, 163–169 (2014).
120. Knicker, H. How does fire affect the nature and stability of soil organic nitrogen 
and carbon? A review. Biogeochemistry 85, 91–118 (2007).
121. Knicker, H., Hilscher, A., Gonzalez-Vila, F. J. & Almendros, G. A new conceptual model for the structural properties of char produced during vegetation fires. Org. Geochem. 39, 935–939 (2008).
122. LeBoeuf, E. J. & Weber, W. J. Macromolecular characteristics of natural organic matter. 1. Insights from glass transition and enthalpic relaxation behavior. Environ. Sci. Technol. 34, 3623–3631 (2000).
123. Schaumann, G. E. Soil organic matter beyond molecular structure. Part I: 
macromolecular and supramolecular characteristics. J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci.  
169, 145–156 (2006).
124. Chilom, G. & Rice, J. A. Glass transition and crystallite melting in natural organic matter. Org. Geochem. 36, 1339–1346 (2005).
125. Keiluweit, M., Nico, P. S., Johnson, M. G. & Kleber, M. Dynamic molecular 
structure of plant biomass-derived black carbon (biochar). Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 1247–1253 (2010).
Author Contributions Both authors contributed equally to the concept, outline, and writing of the manuscript.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at 
www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to  
J.L. (CL273@cornell.edu).
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
