REVIEW
published: 22 August 2018
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00923
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 1 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923Editedby:
AdrianoD.Andricopulo,
UniversidadedeSãoPaulo,Brazil
Reviewedby:
JoséPedroCerón-Carrasco,
UniversidadCatólicaSanAntoniode
Murcia,Spain
AndreaMozzarelli,
UniversitàdegliStudidiParma,Italy
*Correspondence:
StefanoMoro
stefano.moro@unipd.it
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
ExperimentalPharmacologyandDrug
Discovery,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinPharmacology
Received: 04May2018
Accepted: 26July2018
Published: 22August2018
Citation:
SalmasoVandMoroS(2018)
BridgingMolecularDockingto
MolecularDynamicsinExploring
Ligand-ProteinRecognitionProcess:
AnOverview.
Front.Pharmacol.9:923.
doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00923Bridging Molecular Docking to
Molecular Dynamics in Exploring
Ligand-Protein Recognition Process:
An Overview
VeronicaSalmasoandStefanoMoro *
MolecularModelingSection,DepartmentofPharmaceutical andPharmacologicalSciences,UniversityofPadova,Padov a,
Italy
Computational techniques have been applied in the drug disc overy pipeline since the
1980s. Given the low computational resources of the time, th e ﬁrst molecular modeling
strategiesreliedonarigidviewoftheligand-targetbindi ngprocess.Duringtheyears,the
evolution of hardware technologies has gradually allowed s imulating the dynamic nature
of the binding event. In this work, we present an overview of t he evolution of structure-
based drug discovery techniques in the study of ligand-targ et recognition phenomenon,
goingfromthestaticmoleculardockingtowardenhancedmol eculardynamicsstrategies.
Keywords:ligand-proteinbinding,moleculardocking,molec ulardynamics,enhancedsampling,proteinﬂexibility,
molecular recognition
INTRODUCTION
Noproteinisanislandbutexertsitsfunctionthroughtherec ognitionofothermolecularpartners
(Salmaso, 2018 ). Ligand-protein interactions are involved in many biologi cal processes with
consequent pharmaceutical implications. Thus, the scientiﬁ c community has been putting a great
eﬀort into the investigation of the binding phenomenon during the years, leading to the proposal
ofseveraltheoriescharacterizedbyanincreasingemphasis onthedegreeofﬂexibilityoftheligand
andproteincounterparts.
The ﬁrst explanation of binding was provided by Emil Fischer in 1894 (Fischer, 1894 ) with
the “lock-key” model to interpret enzyme speciﬁcity: the liga nd rigidly recognizes and occupies
the protein binding site like a key to its lock, because of thei r native shape complementary.
Since this model could not explain either the behavior of enzy me noncompetitive inhibition or
allostericmodulation,diﬀerentmodiﬁcationshavebeenpropos ed.Koshland(1958) introducedthe
“induced-ﬁt”theory:accordingtohisobservationsonenzy me-substrateinteractions,theligandis
able to induce conformational changes to the protein, optimiz ing ligand-target interactions. Later
workssuggestedthatproteinsnaturallyexistasanensemble ofconformations( Monodetal.,1965 ),
describedbyanenergylandscape( Frauenfelderetal.,1991 ),andligandspreferentiallybindtoone
ofthem(Austinetal.,1975;FooteandMilstein,1994 ).Accordingtothisinterpretationofbinding,
known as “conformational selection,” the ligand stabilize s one of the protein conformations
with a consequent shift of the protein population equilibrium ( Kumar et al., 2000 ). These two
apparently contrasting theories have simply diﬀerent ranges of applicability, and the descriptions
they provide of molecular binding diﬀer for the chronological s equence of events in which the
bindingprocessisdecomposed( KobilkaandDeupi,2007;OkazakiandTakada,2008;Zhou,2010 ).
Newtheoriesareemerging,makingacompromisebetweentheaf orementionedones:accordingto
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
the extended conformational selection model, for example,
the conformational selection is followed by a conformation al
adjustment(inducedﬁt)( Csermelyetal.,2010 ).
The evolution of binding models has practical relevance
besidesanepistemologicalsigniﬁcance;theknowledgeofli gand-
target binding is at the basis of rational drug design but
understanding this complex process on a mechanistic level may
open new scenarios. In addition, to suggest ligand modiﬁcati on
meant to optimize the ﬁnal bound state, the medicinal chemist
may look at kinetically relevant intermediate states and tr y to
aﬀectthem.
COMPUTATIONAL METHODS TO STUDY
LIGAND-PROTEIN BINDING
Since the 1980s, computer technologies have been applied to
the drug discovery process ( Van Drie, 2007 ), giving rise to
Computer-Aided Drug Design (CADD). This technique earned
soon great interest and deserved a cover article on October 5 ,
1981, Fortune magazine, entitled “Next Industrial Revoluti on:
Designing Drugs by Computer at Merck” ( Van Drie, 2007 ).
CADD techniques are used principally for three reasons: virtu al
screening hit/leadoptimizationanddesignofnovelcompounds.
In virtual screening a huge database of compounds is examined
searching for binding capacity for a target and a subset of
compounds is picked out and suggested for in vitrotesting; the
purpose is to increase the hitrate of novel drugs by reducing
the number of compounds to test experimentally. The second
applicationofCADDistheoptimizationofa hit/leadcompound
driven by the rationalization of a structure-activity rela tionship.
Aftertheindividuationofkeyelementsforbinding,thedes ignof
newcompoundscanbeattempted( Salmaso,2018 ).
CADD methods may be classiﬁed as ligand-based (LB)
and structure-based (SB), depending on the availability and
employment of the target structure ( Sliwoski et al., 2014 ). In
the framework of CADD, structure-based drug design (SBDD)
methods take advantage of the abundance of experimentally
solvedstructuresintheProteinDataBank( Bermanetal.,2000 ),
which can possibly be used also as templates for homology
models if the structure of interest is lacking. SBDD is based on
thepremisethattheknowledgeofthetargetstructurecanhel pto
rationalize and optimize binding since ligand-target inter actions
aremediatedbytheircomplementarity.Withtheevolutionof the
bindingmodels,itisclearthatspeakingof“targetstructur e”isan
approximation,giventhatproteinsﬂuctuateamonganensemble
ofstructures( MillerandDill,1997 ).
The possibility to predict ligand binding modes and to
interpret binding processes is valuable to individuate, optim ize
and suggest novel ligands, and for this reason, the scientiﬁ c
community has been putting great eﬀorts in developing new
computationaltechniques.
In the following paragraphs, we will present an excursus
over the main structure-based computational techniques
employed in drug discovery. An urgency to simulate protein
ﬂexibility throughout binding has been experienced over
the years, arising from the evolution of the binding modelsfrom static to dynamic. The inclusion of ﬂexibility feature s in
conformational sampling entails an increase in the number
of degrees of freedom of the system, and consequently in
the computational eﬀort. For this reason, the development
of computational tools has been occurring in parallel
and thanks to the continuous improvement of hardware
technologies.
Molecular Docking
Molecular docking techniques aim to predict the best matching
binding mode of a ligand to a macromolecular partner (here
just proteins are considered). It consists in the generation of
a number of possible conformations/orientations, i.e., poses, o f
the ligand within the protein binding site. For this reason, t he
availability of the three-dimensional structure of the mole cular
target is a necessary condition; it can be an experimentally
solved structure (such as by X-ray crystallography or NMR)
or a structure obtained by computational techniques (such as
homologymodeling)( Salmaso,2018 ).
Molecular docking is composed mainly by two stages: an
engine for conformations/orientations sampling and a scori ng
function, which associates a score to each predicted pose
(Abagyan and Totrov, 2001; Kitchen et al., 2004; Huang and
Zou, 2010 ). The sampling process should eﬀectively search the
conformational space described by the free energy landscape,
where energy, in docking, is approximated by the scoring
function. The scoring function should be able to associate t he
nativebound-conformationtotheglobalminimumoftheenerg y
hypersurface.
Scoring Functions
Scoring functions play the role of poses selector, used to
discriminate putative correct binding modes and binders fro m
non-binders in the pool of poses generated by the sampling
engine.
Thereareessentiallythreetypesofscoringfunctions:
1. Force-ﬁeldbasedscoringfunctions:
Force-ﬁeld is a concept typical of molecular mechanics
(seeBox1) which approximates the potential energy of
a system with a combination of bonded (intramolecular)
and nonbonded (intermolecular) components. In molecular
docking, the nonbonded components are generally taken into
account, with possibly the addition of the ligand-bonded term s,
especiallythetorsionalcomponents.Intermolecularcomponen ts
include the van der Waals term, described by the Lennard-
Jones potential, and the electrostatic potential, described by
the Coulomb function, where a distance-dependent dielectric
may be introduced to mimic the solvent eﬀect. However,
additional terms have been added to the force-ﬁeld scoring
functions, such as solvation terms ( Brooijmans and Kuntz,
2003).
ExamplesofforceﬁeldbasedscoringfunctionsareGoldScore
(Verdonketal.,2003 ),AutoDock( Morrisetal.,1998 )(improved
as a semiempirical version in AutoDock4, Huey et al., 2007 ),
GBVI/WSA( Corbeiletal.,2012 ).
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 2 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
2. Empiricalscoringfunctions:
These functions are the sum of various empirical energy
terms such as van der Waals, electrostatic, hydrogen
bond, desolvation, entropy, hydrophobicity, etc., which are
weighted by coeﬃcients optimized to reproduce binding
aﬃnity data of a training set by least squares ﬁtting
(HuangandZou,2010 ).
The LUDI ( Böhm, 1994 ) scoring function was the ﬁrst
example of an empirical one. Other empirical scoring functions
are GlideScore ( Halgren et al., 2004; Friesner et al., 2006 ),
ChemScore( Eldridgeetal.,1997 ),PLANTS CHEMPLP(Korbetal.,
2009).
3. Knowledge-basedscoringfunctions:
Box 1| Molecular mechanics.
Molecular mechanics is a method which approximates the trea tment
of molecules with the laws of classical mechanics, in order t o limit
the computational cost required for quantum mechanical cal culations
(Vanommeslaeghe et al., 2014 ). Atoms are considered as charged spheres
connected by springs, neglecting the presence of electrons , in accordance
with Born-Oppenheimer approximation ( Born and Oppenheimer, 1927 ). The
potential energy is approximated by a simple function which is called force-
ﬁeld; it is the sum of bonded (intramolecular) and nonbonded e nergy terms.
The basic form of the function comprise bond stretching and b ending
described by harmonic potential, and torsional potential d escribed by a
trigonometric function, in the bonded portion. Nonbonded t erms consist of
van der Waals and Coulomb electrostatic interactions betwe en couples of
atoms.
As an example, these basic components of the CHARMM [78] forc e ﬁeld
are reported in the following equations
V=Vbonded+Vnonbonded
Vbonded=∑
bondsKb(b−b0)2+∑
anglesKθ(θ−θ0)2
+∑
dihedralsKχ(1+cos(nχ−δ))
Vnonbonded =∑
nonbonded
pairsijqiqj
εrij
+∑
nonbonded
pairsijεij
(
Rmin,ij
rij)12
−2(
Rmin,ij
rij)6

whereKb,Kθ,and K χare the bond, angle and torsional force constants; b,
θandχare bond length, bond angle and dihedral angle (those with th e 0-
subscript are the equilibrium values); nis multiplicity and δthe phase of the
torsional periodic function; rijis the distance between atoms iandj;qiandqj
are the partial charges of atoms iandj;εis the effective dielectric constant;
εijis the Lennard-Jones welldepth and Rmin,ijis the distance between atoms
at Lennard-Jones minimum.
These terms may appear slightly different in different forc e-ﬁelds, and
anharmonicity and cross-terms are generally added.
The parameters of the force ﬁeld are obtained by ﬁtting quantum
mechanical or experimental values.These methods assume that ligand-protein contacts statistic ally
moreexploredarecorrelatedwithfavorableinteractions.St arting
from a database of structures, the frequencies of ligand-pro tein
atom pairs contacts are computed and converted into an
energycomponent.Whenevaluatingapose,theaforementioned
tabulated energy components are summed up for all ligand-
proteinatompairs,givingthescoreofthepose.
DrugScore ( Gohlke et al., 2000; Velec et al., 2005 ) and
GOLD/ASP ( Mooij and Verdonk, 2005 ) are examples of
knowledge-basedscoringfunctions.
Another strategy consists in the combination of multiple
scoring functions leading to the so-called consensus scorin g
(Charifsonetal.,1999 ).
In addition, new scoring functions have been developed: for
example, based on machine learning technologies, interacti on
ﬁngerprints and attempts with quantum mechanical scores
(Yurievetal.,2015 ).
Sampling
Theﬁrstmoleculardockingalgorithmwasdevelopedinthe198 0s
byKuntzetal.(1982) ;thereceptorwasapproximatedbyaseries
of spheres ﬁlling its surface clefts, and the ligand by another s et
of spheres deﬁning its volume. A search was made to ﬁnd the
best steric overlap between binding site and receptor spheres,
neglectinganykindofconformationalmovement.
This method belongs to the group of fully-rigid docking
techniques,accordingtotheclassiﬁcationwhichdividesdo cking
methods according to the degrees of ﬂexibility of the molecu les
involvedinthecalculation Halperinetal.,2002 (Figure1):
1. Rigiddocking:
Bothligandandproteinareconsideredrigidentities,andjust the
three translational and three rotational degrees of freedo m are
consideredduringsampling.Thisapproximationisanalogousto
the “lock-key” binding model and is mainly used for protein-
proteindocking,wherethenumberofconformationaldegrees of
freedom is too high to be sampled. Generally, in these methods,
thebindingsiteandtheligandareapproximatedby“hot”points
and the superposition of matching point is evaluated ( Taylor
etal.,2002 ).
2. Semi-ﬂexibledocking:
Justoneofthemolecules,theligand,isﬂexible,whiletheprot ein
is rigid. Thus, the conformational degrees of freedom of the
ligand are sampled, in addition to the six translational plus
rotationalones.Thesemethodsassumethataﬁxedconformat ion
of a protein may correspond to the one able to recognize the
ligandstobedocked.Thisassumption,asalreadyreported,is not
alwaysveriﬁed.
3. Flexibledocking:
It is based on the concept that a protein is not a passive rigid
entity during binding and considers both ligand and protein as
ﬂexible counterparts. Diﬀerent methods have been introduced
during the years, some rested on the induced ﬁt binding model
andothersonconformationalselection.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 3 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
FIGURE 1 | Molecular docking techniques organized according to
ligand-protein ﬂexibility and conformational searching en gines.
Thegreatnumberofdegreesoffreedomintroducedbyﬂexible
docking makes the potential energy surface to be a function of
numerous coordinates. Consequently, the computational eﬀor t
requiredtoperformadockingcalculationisaugmented,butb oth
samplingandscoringshouldbeoptimizedtogiveagoodbalance
between accuracy and speed. In fact, virtual screening campai gn
of millions of compounds depends on the velocity of docking
calculations.Forthisreason,moreandmoreimprovementsha ve
been made in the development of the new algorithm, able to
deeplysearchthephasespacebutnotattheexpenseofvelocity.
Semi-ﬂexible Docking
Numerous docking algorithms have been developed since the
1980s.Oftenitisdiﬃculttoclassifyclearlyeachdockings oftware,
because diﬀerent algorithms may be integrated into a multi-
phase approach. However, docking algorithms can be classiﬁed
asfollows( Kitchenetal.,2004;HuangandZou,2010 ):
1. Systematicsearchtechniques:
Inasystematicsearch,asetofdiscretizedvaluesisassoci atedwith
eachdegreeoffreedom,andallthevaluesofeachcoordinate are
explored in a combinatorial way ( Brooijmans and Kuntz, 2003 ).
Thesemethodsaresubdividedinto:
a.Exhaustive search - it is a systematic search in the strict sense
since all the rotatable bonds of the ligands are examined in
a systematic way. A number of constraints and termination
criteria is generally established to limit the search space a nd
to avoid a combinatorial explosion. The docking pipeline of
the software Glide ( Friesner et al., 2004; Halgren et al., 2004 )
involvesastageoftheexhaustivesearch.b.Fragmentation - the ﬁrst implementation of ligand ﬂexibility
into docking was introduced by DesJarlais et al. (1986) , who
proposed a method made of fragmentation of the ligand,
rigid docking of the fragments into the binding site, and
subsequent linking of the fragments. In this way, partial
ﬂexibilityisimplementedatthejointsbetweenthefragment s.
Other methods, deﬁned as incremental construction, dock
one fragment ﬁrst and then attach incrementally the others.
ExamplesofmethodsutilizingfragmentationareFlexX( Rarey
etal.,1996 )andHammerhead( Welchetal.,1996 ).
c.Conformational Ensemble - rigid docking algorithms can be
easily enriched by a sort of ﬂexibility if an ensemble of
previously generated conformers of the ligand is docked to
the target, in a sort of conformational selection fashion on
theligandcounterpart.ExamplesareoﬀeredbyFLOG( Miller
et al., 1994 ), EUDOC ( Pang et al., 2001 ), MS-DOCK ( Sauton
etal.,2008 ).
2. Stochasticmethods:
Stochasticalgorithmschangerandomly,insteadofsystema tically,
thevaluesofthedegreesoffreedomofthesystem.Theadvant age
ofthesetechniquesisthespeed,sotheycouldpotentiallyﬁndth e
optimal solution really fast. As a drawback, they do not ensur e
a full search of the conformational space, so the true solutio n
may be missed. The lack of convergence is partially solved by
increasing the number of iterations of the algorithm. The mo st
famousstochasticalgorithmsare( HuangandZou,2010 ):
a.MonteCarlo(MC)methods -MonteCarlomethodsarebased
on the Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm, which introduces
anacceptancecriterionintheevolutionofthedockingsearc h.
In particular, at every iteration of the algorithm, a random
modiﬁcation of the ligand degrees of freedom is performed.
Then,iftheenergyscoreoftheposeisimproved,thechangeis
accepted,otherwise,itisacceptedaccordingtotheprobabili ty
expressedinthefollowingequation:
P∼exp[−(E1−E0)
kBT]
whereE1andE0are the energy score before and after the
modiﬁcation, kBtheBoltzmannconstant,andTthetemperature
ofthesystem.
This is the original form of the Metropolis algorithm, but
it is implemented in diﬀerent variants within docking softwar e.
Some example are provided by the earlier versions of AutoDock
(Goodsell and Olson, 1990; Morris et al., 1996 ), ICM (Abagyan
et al., 1994 ), QXP (McMartin and Bohacek, 1997 ), MCDOCK
(Liu and Wang, 1999 ), AutoDock Vina ( Trott and Olson, 2010 ),
ROSETTALIGAND( MeilerandBaker,2006 ).
b.Tabu search methods - the aim of these algorithms is to
prevent the exploration of already sampled zones of the
conformational/positional space. Random modiﬁcations are
performed on the degrees of freedom of the ligand at each
iteration. The already sampled conformations are registered ,
and when a new pose is obtained, it is accepted only if not
similartoanypreviouslyexploredpose.PRO_LEADS( Baxter
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 4 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
etal.,1998 )andPSI-DOCK( Peietal.,2006 )aretwoexamples
ofthiscategory.
c.Evolutionary Algorithms (EA)-thesealgorithmsarebasedon
theideaofbiologicalevolution,withthemostfamousGenet ic
Algorithms (GAs). The concept of the gene, chromosome,
mutation, and crossover are borrowed from biology. In
particular, the degrees of freedom are encoded into genes,
and each conformation of the ligand is described by a
chromosome (collection of genes), which is assigned a ﬁtnes s
score. Mutations and crossovers occur within a population of
chromosomes, and chromosomes with higher ﬁtness survive
and replace the worst ones. The most famous examples are
GOLD (Jones et al., 1995, 1997 ), AutoDock 3 & 4 (which
implement a diﬀerent version of GA, the Lamarckian GA)
(Morris et al., 1998 ), PSI-DOCK ( Pei et al., 2006 ), rDock
(Ruiz-Carmonaetal.,2014 ).
d.Swarm optimization (SO) methods - these methods take
inspiration from swarm behavior. The sampling of the
degrees of freedom of a ligand is guided by the information
deposited by already sampling good poses. For example,
PLANTS ( Korb et al., 2006 ) adopts an ACO (Ant Colony
Optimization) algorithm, which mimics the behavior of ants,
who communicate the easiest way to reach a source of food
through the deposition of pheromone. Here, each degree of
freedom is associated with a pheromone. Virtual ants choose
conformations considering the values of pheromones, and
successfulantscontributetopheromonedeposition.
Other examples of SOs are SODOCK ( Chen et al., 2007 ),
pso@autodock( NamasivayamandGünther,2007 ),PSOVina( Ng
etal.,2015 ).
3. Simulationmethods:
The most famous example of this category is Molecular
Dynamics, a method that describes the time evolution of a
system. A wider explanation will be given in section Molecular
Dynamics.
Energyminimizationmethodscanbeinsertedinthiscategor y,
but generally, they are not used as stand-alone search engin es
(Kitchenetal.,2004 ).Energyminimizationisalocaloptimization
technique, used to bring the system to the closest minimum on
thepotentialenergysurface.
Flexible Docking
Some attempts have been made to introduce protein ﬂexibility
into docking calculations. These methods take advantage of
diﬀerent degrees of approximation and can be divided into
approaches that consider single protein or multiple protein
conformations( Alonsoetal.,2006 ).
1. SingleProteinConformation:
a. Softdocking:
This method, ﬁrstly described by Jiang and Kim (1991) , consists
of an implicit and rough treatment of protein ﬂexibility. The
van der Waals repulsion term employed in force ﬁeld scoring
functions is reduced, allowing small clashes that permit a cl oser
ligand-protein packing. In this way, a sort of induced-ﬁt issimulated. As a drawback, this approach approximates just
feeble protein movements and could implicate unreal poses
(Apostolakisetal.,1998;Viethetal.,1999 ).
b. Sidechainﬂexibility:
This strategy introduces alternative conformations for so me
protein side chains ( Leach, 1994 ). This is generally done
exploitingdatabasesofrotamerlibraries.Somedockingmet hods,
suchasGOLD,samplesomedegreesoffreedomwithintheirown
searchengine.Obviously,consideringsidechainﬂexibility ,huge
conformational variations of the protein are neglected by the se
methods.
2. MultipleProteinConformations:
Multiple experimental structures may be available for the same
target. Moreover, an ensemble of protein conformations can be
obtained via computational techniques, such as Monte Carlo or
Molecular Dynamics simulations. The idea of multiple protein
conformations docking is to take into account all the divers e
structures,followingdiﬀerentpossiblestrategies:
a. Averagegrid:
The structures of the ensemble are used to construct a single
average-grid, which can be either a simple or weighted averag e
combinationofthem( Knegteletal.,1997 ).
b. Uniteddescriptionoftheprotein:
In this case, the structures do not collapse into an average gr id
but are usedtoconstruct thebest performing “chimera”protei n.
For example, FlexE ( Rarey et al., 1996 ) extracts the structurally
conservedportionsfromthestructuresoftheensembleanduse s
themtoconstructanaveragerigidstructure.Thisportionis fused
to the ﬂexible parts of the ensemble in a combinatorial fashio n,
givingapoolof“chimeras”thatareusedfordocking.
c. Individualconformations:
The structures of the ensemble are considered as conformatio ns
that can possibly be bound by the ligand, so various docking
runs are performed, evaluating the ligands of interest on all
the target conformations ( Huang and Zou, 2007 ). Moreover, a
preliminary benchmark assessing the performance of diﬀerent
targetstructuresinacross-dockingexperimentmaybeemploy ed
toﬁltertheensembleofstructures( Salmasoetal.,2016,2018 ).
Among the drugs approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, few examples of successful applications of
CADD are available ( Talele et al., 2010 ). Among them,
the renin-inhibitor Aliskiren was developed by means of
a combination of molecular modeling and crystallographic
structure analysis ( Wood et al., 2003 ). However, the binding of
non-peptidomimetic ligands to renin has shown huge structura l
rearrangement of the protein ( Teague, 2003 ), addressing the
problem of considering protein ﬂexibility in drug design
campaigns. Recently, a comparative study evaluating the
performance of ensemble docking and individual crystal
structure docking has been proposed for renin ( Strecker and
Meyer, 2018 ). An ensemble of 4 crystal structures outperformed
the mean results of individual crystal structures in terms of
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 5 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
binding mode prediction and screening utility. The ensemble
gave worse results than the best performing crystal structur e,
which though is not known a priori. Not as good results
were obtained through a Molecular Dynamics ensemble when
compared to crystallographic structures, as conﬁrmed in othe r
cases reported in the literature ( Osguthorpe et al., 2012; Ganser
et al., 2018 ). However, Molecular Dynamics has proven to be
eﬀective as a tool to explore molecular conformations and as a
dockingmethoditself,asreportedinthefollowingparagraphs.
Molecular Dynamics
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a computational technique which
simulates the dynamic behavior of molecular systems as a
function of time, treating all the entities in the simulatio n box
(ligand,protein,aslongaswatersifexplicit)asﬂexible( Salmaso,
2018).
It was developed to simulate simple systems, with the
ﬁrst application to study collisions among hard spheres, in
1957 (Alder and Wainwright, 1957 ). The ﬁrst MD simulation
of a biomolecule was accomplished in 1977 by McCammon
et al. (McCammon et al., 1977 ); it was a 9.2 ps simulation
of a 58-residues Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin Inhibitor (BPTI) ,
performed in vacuum with a crude molecular mechanics
potential.
Molecular dynamics compute the movements of atoms along
time by the integration of Newton’s equations of motions
(classicalmechanics),reportedinthefollowingequation( Leach,
2001;AdcockandMcCammon,2006 ).
d2ri(t)
dt2=Fi(t)
mi
withFi(t)forceexertedonatom iattimet,ri(t)vectorpositionof
theatom iattimet,mimassoftheatom( Figure2).
Inparticular,timeispartitionedintotimesteps( δt),whichare
usedtopropagatethesystemforwardintime.Severalintegrat ion
algorithms are available, which derive Newton’s equations by
a discrete-time numerical approximation. The velocity-Verl et
integrator is reported in the following equations as an exampl e
to compute position and velocity of an atom iat the time step
t+δt,startingfromstep t.
ri(t+δt)=ri(t)+vi(t)δt+1
2ai(t)δt2
vi(t+δt)=vi(t)+1
2[ai(t)+ai(t+δt)]δt
whereri(t),vi(t)andai(t)are respectively position, velocity
and acceleration of atom iat timet, andri(t+δt),vi(t+δt)and
ai(t+δt)are respectively position, velocity and acceleration of
atomiattimet+δt.
Acceleration is calculated from the forces acting on atom i
accordingtoNewton’ssecondlaw,andforcesarecomputedfro m
theforceﬁeld,accordingtothefollowingequation:
ai(t)=d2ri(t)
dt2=Fi(t)
mi= −dV(r(t))
midri(t)whereV(r(t))is the potential energy function retrieved by the
forceﬁeld(see Box1).
The most used force ﬁelds in molecular dynamics are
CHARMM ( MacKerell et al., 1998 ), AMBER ( Cornell et al.,
1995), OPLS ( Jorgensen and Tirado-Rives, 1988 ) and GROMOS
(Oostenbrinketal.,2004 ).
Molecular Dynamics and Exploration of the Phase
Space
MD trajectories can be used as sampling engines; in fact, they
produce protein conformations usable for Multiple Protein
Conformations docking applications. In particular, McCammon
et al. developed the so-called Relaxed-Complex Scheme (RCS),
consisting in docking mini-libraries of compounds with
AutoDock ( Morris et al., 1998 ) against a large ensemble of
snapshotsderivedfromunligandedproteinMDtrajectories( Lin
et al., 2002, 2003; Amaro et al., 2008 ). This approach is based
on the conformational selection binding model, disregarding
any inﬂuence of the ligand on the receptor. The application
of the RCS to the UDP-galactose 4′-epimerase ( TbGalE),
for example, led to the identiﬁcation of 14 low-micromolar
inhibitors( Durrantetal.,2010 ).Anothercomputationalpipeline
integrating MD simulations and virtual screening has proved
to be eﬀective: the coupling of MD, clustering, and choice of
the target structure through ﬁngerprints for ligand and prote ins
(MD-FLAP)improvedVSperformance( Spyrakisetal.,2015 ).
MD has further applications as a docking-coupled technique
(Alonso et al., 2006 ) more anchored to the induced-ﬁt model, as
it can be used to assess stability ( Sabbadin et al., 2014; Yu et al.,
2018),toreﬁneandtorescoredockingposes( Rastellietal.,2009 ).
The relevance of MD simulations as source of target
conformational profusion can be exploited to retrieve insigh ts
into cryptic pockets or allosteric binding sites ( Durrant and
McCammon, 2011 ), as reported by Schame et al., who identiﬁed
an alternative binding site, named “trench,” close to the act ive
site of the HIV-1 integrase ( Schames et al., 2004 ). Moreover,
simulationsintheexplicitsolventmaygiveinformationonw ater
molecules, that can be classiﬁed as “cold” or stable and “hot ” or
unstable(forarecentandcomprehensiveoverviewontheroleo f
water in SBDD; see Spyrakis et al., 2017 ). In particular, MD may
enabletoindividuaterelevantwatermolecules,according totheir
order (Li and Lazaridis, 2003 ) and stationarity ( Cuzzolin et al.,
2018), and to estimate their contribution in modulating ligand
binding(Bortolatoetal.,2013;Betzetal.,2016 ).
All the aforementioned applications of MD are used as a
complement to classic molecular docking techniques. however ,
the simulation of the complete binding process of a ligand,
from the unbound state in bulk solvent to the bound state,
be considered a fully-ﬂexible docking in explicit solvent. Th e
possibility to investigate the whole binding process could giv e
insights into metastable states reached by the ligand durin g
the simulation, alternative binding sites, the role of wate r
during binding and conformational rearrangements precedin g,
concurrentorconsecutivetobinding.
However,theobservationofabindingeventduringaclassica l
MD simulation is very rare, raising the timescale problem. The
timestep in molecular dynamics has to be compatible with the
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 6 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
FIGURE 2 | Schematic representation of a molecular dynamics cycle.
fastest motion in the system; in particular, a timestep of 1–2
fs, corresponding to bond vibrations, has to be used. Thus, a
highnumberofMDstepsisrequiredtosimulateslowprocesses,
such as large domain motions and binding ( µs-ms) (Henzler-
Wildman and Kern, 2007 ), making the computational eﬀort
really hard. In particular, slow timescale are linked to proce sses
that require the overcoming of a high energy barrier ( Henzler-
WildmanandKern,2007 ),correspondingtolowpopulatedstates
intheconformationalenergylandscape;inthiscasethesimu lated
system gets trapped in a local minimum, making classical MD
inadequatetoexplorelargelytheconformationalspace.
Advances in Classical MD Simulations
In1998DuanandKollmanperformedtheﬁrst1 µssimulationof
aproteininexplicitsolvent,observingthefoldingofa36-re sidue
villin headpiece subdomain from a fully unfolded state. This
simulation was two orders of magnitude longer than a state-
of-the-art simulation of that period, and it was made possible
by advances in massively parallel supercomputers and eﬃcient
parallelized codes, but still required 2 months of CPU (Centr al
ProcessingUnits)time( DuanandKollman,1998 ).
Specializedinformaticinfrastructureshavealsobeendesi gned
speciﬁcally for MD calculations; for example, a supercomputer
named Anton was conceived as a “computational microscope”
andwasdevelopedwiththeideatoreachpreviouslyinaccessible
simulation timescales within a reasonable computation time
(Shaw et al., 2008 ). This machine allowed Shaw et al. tocharacterize the folding of FiP35 WW domain from a fully
extended state in a 100 µs simulation and, in addition, to
reach the millisecond timescale in a single simulation of BP TI
in the folded-state ( Shaw et al., 2010 ), followed recently by
ubiquitin( Lindorﬀ-Larsenetal.,2016 ).Moreover,withunbiased
simulations in the order of ten microseconds, Shaw’s group
couldsimulatethecompletebindingprocessofbetablockersan d
agonists to the β2-adrenergic receptor ( Dror et al., 2011 ) and
kinaseinhibitorstoSrckinase( Shanetal.,2011 ).
Asadrawback,theutilizationofsupercomputerisanexpense
thatnotmanyresearchgroupscanaﬀord.Fortunately,therece nt
years have been characterized by the development of code able
toexploitthespeedofGPUs(GraphicsProcessingUnits),which
has given access to tera-scale performances with the use of a
common workstation, and a consequent relatively low cost ( Van
Meeletal.,2008;Friedrichsetal.,2009;Harveyetal.,2009 ;Nobile
et al., 2017 ). The architecture of a GPU is meant to parallelize a
computationoverthousandsofcores,withallcoresexecutin gthe
same instructions on diﬀerent data (“Same Instruction Multiple
Data,” SIM) ( Nobile et al., 2017 ). For this reason, together with
few preliminary applications in the ﬁeld of molecular docking
(Korb et al., 2011; Khar et al., 2013 ), GPUs have been mainly
exploited for MD simulations, which can be parallelized at the
level of atoms. In fact, nowadays, simulations of hundreds o f
nanosecondsareeasilyperformed,andreachingthemicrosec ond
timescale is an aﬀordable issue on a GPU-equipped workstation
(Harvey and De Fabritiis, 2012 ). In addition, cloud computing
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 7 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
has been emerging nowadays, not just through the use of web-
servers intended to make molecular modeling accessible to a
community of non-developers users, but also with the provisio n
of computation power scalable and on-demand ( Ebejer et al.,
2013). As an example, AceCloud is an on-demand service for
MD simulations, which is accessed through an extension of the
ACEMDMDcode( HarveyandDeFabritiis,2015 ).
Moreover, a paradigm shift seems to have been spreading,
that is the possibility to simulate long processes using
numerous trajectories shorter than the process itself inste ad
of a single long trajectory. This idea has been exploited by
the folding@home project, a worldwide distributed computing
environment beneﬁtting from the computers of private citizen s,
whennotinuse( ShirtsandPande,2000 ).Sinceduringaclassical
MDsimulation,thesystemisstuckinaminimum,waitingforth e
fortunateeventthattriggerstheovercomingofanenergyba rrier,
thesimulationofmanytrajectoriesinparallelwouldincrea sethe
probabilitytomeettheluckyevent.Thus,numeroussimulati ons
are started from the same initial condition and run in paralle l
on diﬀerent computers, and when one escapes from the energy
minimum, all the simulations are stopped and started from the
newproductiveconﬁguration( Pandeetal.,2003 ).
The new paradigm has found its best application in the use
of Markov State Models (MSMs) and adaptive sampling. In
fact, MSMs are based on an ensemble view of the dynamics,
from which statistical properties, such as the probability to
occupy a state and the probability to jump from one state to
another, are computed. The construction of a Markov model
is made of the discretization and projection of a trajectory
into microstates, and of a transition probability matrix T( τ)
computation at a given time, the lag-time τ, chosen in a
way that the transition is memory-less (Markovian). Each
elementT ij(τ)ofthetransitionmatrixrepresentstheconditional
probability to ﬁnd the system in state jat timet+τwhile
being in state iat timet. The transition matrix approximates
the dynamic of the system and enables to extrapolate the
free energy from the equilibrium probability distribution o f
the system and the timescale of the slowest processes, even
if they are not directly explored. In a qualitative fashion, th e
MSM may individuate diverse metastable states and construct
multi-states models of the processes ( Prinz et al., 2011 ). As an
example, an MSM was constructed on an aggregate of nearly
500 100 ns-trajectories describing benzamidine-trypsin bi nding
(with 37% productive trajectories); this enabled to charact erize
the binding process individuating three transition states, and
to estimate binding free energy with 1 kcal/mol diﬀerence
from the experimental one (while a higher deviation from
experiment was associated with the extrapolated k onand koﬀ)
(Buch et al., 2011 ). Moreover, the computation of MSM on
the collected data can give a feedback about undersampled
zones of the phase space, suggesting where to focus further
simulation, adapting the sampling (adaptive sampling methods)
and increasing the eﬃciency of simulations ( Bowman et al.,
2010; Doerr and De Fabritiis, 2014 ). Currently, the major
diﬃcultiesofthistechniquearerelatedtothetrajectorypa rtition
into discrete states, the choice of the lagtime and suﬃcient
sampling to guarantee statistical signiﬁcance ( Pande et al.,
2010).Several alternative techniques have been developed during
the years to overcome the time limitation imposed by classical
MD simulations. A ﬁrst example consists of the Coarse-Grained
MD simulations, in which groups of atoms are condensed into
spheres,reducingthedegreesoffreedomofthesystem( Kmiecik
et al., 2016 ). This simpliﬁes the conformational landscape of
the system, but, as a drawback, the information on the all-at om
simulations,thatarepreciousfordrug-discoveryaim,arel ost.
Additionalstrategiesconsistofenhancedsamplingtechnique s
that apply a bias to molecular dynamics simulations to increas e
theaccessibletimescale,enablingthesimulationofslowpro cesses
like binding, unbinding and folding processes in a reduced
amountoftime.
Enhanced Sampling Techniques
These methods add a bias force/potential to the system to
increase the rate of escape from local minima, entailing
an acceleration of conformational sampling. They have
been conceived primarily to study either folding or binding
or unbinding processes, sharing the underlying idea of
enhancementofsamplingandovercominghighenergybarriers.
Enhanced sampling techniques can be divided into methods
that make use of collective variables to introduce the bias a nd
methodsthatdonot( DeVivoetal.,2016 )(Figure3).
The employment of a collective variable (CV) is based on
the idea that a complex system can be decomposed into one
or a combination of reaction coordinates describing the proc ess
of interest. These coordinates are named as collective vari ables
sinceitisassumedtheycansummarizethebehavioroftheent ire
system. After a careful choice of the CVs, the bias is added
on these coordinates during the simulation enhancing sampli ng
along the CVs. The phase space is reduced to the space of the
collective variables, since the conformational space is proj ected
totheselectedCVs,withaconsequentdimensionalreduction of
thefreeenergysurface.
In the following paragraphs, few representative enhanced
sampling techniques are reported as an example, focusing on
their application in binding and unbinding and going toward a
fullydynamicdocking( DeVivoandCavalli,2017 ).
Collectivevariables-freemethods
Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics (REMD) This
method adopts an increase in temperature to accelerate the
conformational sampling. The ﬁrst formulation of Replica
Exchange MD ( Sugita and Okamoto, 1999 ), also known as
Parallel Tempering (PT), consists of the parallel simulation
of a number of independent and simultaneous replicas of the
same system, starting from the same conﬁguration, but at
diﬀerent temperatures. At regular time intervals, two replicas
characterized by neighbor temperatures are switched, or, in
otherterms,theirtemperaturesareexchanged,withaprobabi lity
determinedbytheenergy( E)andtemperature( T)ofthesystem.
In particular, the transition probability between simulatio ns
at temperature T1andT2is determined by the Metropolis
criterion:
P(T1:T2)={1 for[β2−β1](E1−E2)≤0
e−[β2−β1](E1−E2)for[β2−β1](E1−E2)>0
where β=1/kBT(withkBtheBoltzmannconstant).
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 8 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
FIGURE 3 | Summary of the enhanced sampling techniques described duri ng this work.
Temperaturesareupdatedbyrescalingthevelocitiesofthepar ent
simulations ( v1andv2tov1′andv2′) according to the following
equation:


v′
1=√
T2
T1v1
v′
2=√
T1
T2v2
The choice of the panel of temperatures is critical, and various
strategies have been proposed to guide the selection ( Patriksson and
vanderSpoel,2008 ).
Further development of REMD has been introduced, such
as the Hamiltonian Replica Exchange (H-REMD), where
Hamiltonians are exchanged among replicas instead of temperatu res
(Fukunishi et al., 2002 ), and Replica Exchange with Solute
Tempering, where a diﬀerent treatment of the central group
and the solvent buﬀer is performed ( Liu et al., 2005 ). HREMD
has been recently combined to conventional MD simulations
using multi-ensemble Markov models (MEMMs) ( Wu et al.,2016) to investigate the multistate kinetics of Mdm2 and its
inhibitor peptide PMI ( Paul et al., 2017 ). An ensemble of 500 µs
unbiased MD simulations conducted from diﬀerent initial states,
especially dissociated, were combined to HREMD simulations (6
simulations of 1 µs and with 14 replicas) to enhance sampling
of rare dissociation events; the results were analyzed through
the TRAMMBAR estimator, leading to the prediction of a
residence time beyond the second timescale, despite a sub-
millisecond simulation time. Moreover, the trajectories were
furtherly analyzed to investigate the binding mechanism and
binding-induced folding of PMI ( Paul et al., 2018 ). It appeared
that a multitude of parallel pathways is possible and that binding
and folding are coupled, while not temporarily ordered and
separated.
Accelerated Molecular Dynamics (aMD) Accelerated MD (aMD)
facilitates the egress from a low energy basin by adding a bias
potentialfunction( )Delta1V(r))whenthesystemisentrappedinanenergy
minimum. In particular, when the potential energy ( V(r)) is lower
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 9 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
thanacertaincut-oﬀ( E),thebiasisaddedgivingamodiﬁedpotential
(V∗(r)=V(r)+)Delta1V(r)); otherwise the simulation continues in the
true-unbiasedpotential( V∗(r)=V(r)).
Thebiasfunctionisreportedinthefollowingequation:
)Delta1V(r)=(E−V(r))2
α+(E−V(r))
whereEis the potential energy cut-oﬀ and αis a tuning parameter
determiningthedepthofthemodiﬁedpotentialenergybasin.
Ehas to be at least greater than Vmin(the minimum potential
energy, close to the starting conﬁguration), while α=E-Vminwill
allowmaintainingtheunderlyingshapeofthelandscape( Hamelberg
etal.,2004 ).
As an example, aMD showed qualitatively similar results to
classical MD with fewer computational eﬀort in the simulation
of tiotropium-M 3Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptor binding:
tiotropium was observed to recognize the extracellular vestibul e of
the receptor, as in a previously reported long (16 µs) classical MD
simulation ( Kruse et al., 2012 ), by accelerating the process of about
one order of magnitude (three aMD replicas of 200 ns, 500 ns, and 1
µs)(Kappeletal.,2015 ).
CollectiveVariables-dependentmethods
Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) Taking inspiration from
atomic force microscopy experiments, in Steered MD (SMD) an
external force is applied to a ligand to drive it out of the target
binding site ( Isralewitz et al., 1997, 2001; Izrailev et al., 1997 ). Other
possibilities involve the application of forces on diﬀerent CVs, suc h
asnonlinearcoordinatesthatcanhelptoexploretheconformat ional
rearrangementofproteindomains( Izrailevetal.,1999 ).
SMD gives insights into the ligand-target unbinding mechanism,
which can be investigated through the dynamical evolution of
the ligand-target pattern of interactions, as reported for a se ries
of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 5 (CDK5) inhibitors ( Patel et al.,
2014). In the same work, the second application of SMD in drug
discovery is highlighted: since the bias force added during an SMD
simulation is assumed to be related to the binding strength, the
binding force proﬁle can be used to discriminate binders from non-
binders.
SMDreliesonanapriorideﬁnitionoftheappliedforcedirection,
whichcanbeﬁxed(forexampleasimplestraightline)orcanchange
during the simulation. The choice of the direction is not trivial,
because a ligand may bump into obstructions during its way out of
the protein, but a method evaluating the minimal steric hindrance
has been reported ( Vuong et al., 2015 ). Moreover, integration with
thetargetedmoleculardynamics(TMD)arereported:inTMDabia s
forceisappliedtoconductthesystemfromaninitialtoadesiredﬁn al
conﬁguration ( Schlitter et al., 1993 ), leading to the individuation of
a path that can be used as set of directions for an SMD simulation
(Isralewitzetal.,2001 ).
Random Acceleration Molecular Dynamics (RAMD) Random
Acceleration MD (RAMD), also deﬁned Random Expulsion MD, is
anextensionofSMD,and,likethis,wasdevelopedtostudytheegr ess
of a ligand from its target binding site. It consists of the application
of an artiﬁcial randomly-directed force on a ligand to accelerat e its
unbinding. In this way, in comparison with SMD, RAMD avoids
the preliminary choice of the force direction; consequently, if so me
obstructions are found during the exit pathway, the escape direct ion
isswitched.Inparticular,thedirectionoftheforceischosenstochastically and
maintainedforanumberofMDsteps.Ifduringthistimeintervalthe
average velocity of the ligand is lower than a speciﬁed cut-oﬀ (or , in
otherterms,ifthedistancecoveredbytheligandislowerthanac ut-
oﬀdistance, rmin),meaningthatprobablyarigidobstructionhasbeen
met,anewforcedirectionisassignedtoallowtheligandtosearch for
alternativeexitpathways( Lüdemannetal.,2000 ).
As SMD, RAMD is predominantly used to simulate ligand
unbinding from a molecular target. The egress of carazolol fro m
β2Adrenergic Receptor was for example described thanks to an
ensemble of RAMD simulations (100 simulation, with a variable
length of maximum 1 ns): the extracellular surface opening of the
receptorwasindividuatedasthepredominantexitroot,entailingth e
ruptureofasaltbridgelinkingextracellularloop2totransmem brane
helix7(WangandDuan,2009 ).
Umbrella Sampling (US) Umbrella Sampling (US) ( Torrie and
Valleau, 1977 ) consists of restraining the system along one or a
combination of CVs. Commonly, the range of interest of the CV
is divided into windows, each characterized by a reference value of
the CV ( ξref). The bias potential enhances sampling in each window
by forcing the system to stay close to the respective CV referen ce
value. The bias isafunctionof the reactioncoordinate, and canha ve
diﬀerentshapes,butgenerallyconsistsofasimpleharmonic,as inthe
followingequation:
V(ξ)=k
2(ξ−ξref)2
Wherekisthestrengthofthepotentialand ξisthevalueoftheCV.
Thestrengthofthebiashastobehighenoughtoletenergybarrie rs
crossing, but suﬃciently low to enable the overlapping of syste m
distributions of diﬀerent windows, as required for post-processin g
analysis.
The aim of US is to force sampling in each window to collect
suﬃcient statistics along with the whole reaction coordinate. The n
the distribution of the system and consequently the free energy is
calculated along the CV ( Kästner, 2011 ). Diﬀerent post-processing
methods can be used to perform combination and analysis of the
data coming from the diﬀerent US windows; the most famous
is umbrella integration ( Kästner and Thiel, 2005 ), the weighted
histogram analysis method (WHAM) ( Kumar et al., 1992 ), and
the more recent Dynamic Weighted Histogram Analysis (DHAM)
(Rosta and Hummer, 2015 ), which can be used also to derive kinetic
parameters.
Integrations of US with other enhanced sampling techniques
are reported in the literature, such as the replica-exchange
umbrella sampling method (REUS), where an umbrella potential
is exchanged among replicas ( Sugita et al., 2000; Kokubo et al.,
2011). This technique was applied to the prediction of ligand-
protein binding structures, starting from unbound initial states
and employing as CV ξthe distance between the centers of
mass of the ligand and of the backbone of two selected residues.
This technique resulted to be eﬀective in the prediction of the
binding mode of a couple of ligands on p38 and JNK3 kinases
(RMSD minor than 1.7 Å), and outperformed a cross-docking
experiment, highlighting the importance of considering protein
ﬂexibility to accurately predict the coordinates of a complex
(Kokuboetal.,2013 ).
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 10 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
Metadynamics Metadynamics ( Laio and Parrinello, 2002 )
introduces a bias potential to the Hamiltonian of the system in
the form of a Gaussian-shaped function of one or more CVs. In this
case, the bias does not restrain or constrain the system, neither force
the system along with a preferred direction in the CV space. The
bias is used to keep the memory of the already explored zones of th e
phase space, and to discourage the system to visit them again ( Laio
andGervasio,2008 ).
At time t, the bias potential ( VG(S,t)) is reported in the following
equation:
VG(S,t)=∫t
0dt′ωexp
−d∑
i=1(Si(R)−Si(
R(
t′))
)2
2σ2
i

whereS(R)=(S1(R),...,Sd(R))isasetof dCVs(whicharefunctionsof
thecoordinates Rofthesystem), Si(R(t))isthevalueofthe ithCVat
timet,σiistheGaussianwidthforthe ithCV,and ωistheenergyrate,
givenby:
ω=W
τG
withWtheGaussianheightand τGthedepositionrate.
Thus, the bias is “history-dependent,” because it is the sum of the
Gaussians that have already been deposited in the CV space during
thetime.The free energy landscape is explored, starting from the bottom
of a well, by a random walk; bias-Gaussians are deposited in the CV
space with a given frequency, and at each iteration, the bias is given
by the sum of the already deposited Gaussians. As time goes by, th e
system,insteadofbeingtrappedinthebottomofawell,ispushed out
by the hill of deposited Gaussians and enters a new minimum. The
process continues until all the minima are compensated by the bias
potential( Barduccietal.,2011 ).
Metadynamics in this way enables to enhance sampling and to
reconstruct the free energy surface; this can be used to explor e
binding/unbinding processes ( Gervasio et al., 2005 ), and, with the
application of funnel metadynamics ( Limongelli et al., 2013 ), to the
estimationofbindingfreeenergy.
Unfortunately, it may occur that the free energy surface is
overﬁlled, but this has been partially solved by well-tempere d
metadynamics,inwhichtheheightoftheaddedGaussianisrescaled
by the already deposited bias ( Barducci et al., 2008 ). Another issue
with metadynamics is the choice of the CVs, which should describe
the slowest motions of the system and the initial-ﬁnal-relevant
intermediates. Moreover, a small number of CVs has to be used,
and a good strategy is a combination with other techniques able to
enhanced sampling along a great number of transverse coordina tes
(Barducci et al., 2011 ), such as with parallel tempering ( Bussi
etal.,2006 ).Usingawell-temperedmultiple-walkerfunnel-restrained
metadynamics,thebindingpathwayofseveralligandsto5G-prot ein-
coupled receptors (including X-ray crystal structures and ho mology
models) has been recently explored, resulting in the prediction o f
FIGURE 4 | (A) Sketch of a pepSuMD step: the distance between the centers of mass of the ligand (peptide) and the target is computed at reg ular time intervals
during the SuMD step. The distance values are ﬁtted by a line, w hose slope (m) determines if the current SuMD step (m >0) or a new one (m <0) has to be
simulated. (B)Representation of the binding pathway bringing BAD peptide to the Bcl-X Lbinding site, occurring in 46.2 ns. The superposition of the ﬁnal pepSuMD
state with the experimental structure (PDB ID: 1G5J, Petros et al., 2000 ) is reported on the right.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 11 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
bindingfreeenergieswitharoot-mean-squareerrorminorthan1k cal
mol−1(Salehetal.,2017 ).
Supervised Molecular Dynamics
In the last years, a new method, called Supervised Molecular
Dynamics (SuMD), has been introduced to accelerate the binding
process (Sabbadin and Moro, 2014; Cuzzolin et al., 2016 ). SuMD is
distinguished from enhanced sampling simulations since it does not
aﬀecttheenergyproﬁleofthesystem.
A SuMD simulation consists of a series of small MD windows
(hundredsofpicoseconds),calledSuMDsteps,wherestep n+1isrun
after the evaluation of step nin terms of ligand-target approaching.
During each SuMD step, the distance between the centers of mass
of the ligand and of the target binding site (few selected residues ) is
computed;distancevaluesarecollectedatregularintervals duringthe
simulationandareﬁttedbyaline( Figure4A ).Iftheslopeoftheline
is negative, it means that the ligand is approaching the binding site,
theSuMDstep(step n)isconsideredproductive,andanewstep(step
n+1)isstartedfromthelastcoordinatesandvelocitiesofthecurre nt
step. Otherwise, if the slope is positive, it means that the SuMD step
is unproductive, thus the current SuMD step simulation is deleted
and restarted from its initial coordinates (starting conﬁguration of
stepn). The simulation is concluded after that the distance between
the centers of mass of ligand and target fall under a certain cut -oﬀ.
Finally, the consecutive SuMD steps are merged together providin g
theSuMDtrajectory.
Inthisway,SuMDenablestoobserveabindingeventinareduced
timescale, in the orders of tens to hundreds of nanoseconds, wit hout
the introduction of any energetic bias. Indeed, SuMD simply focuses
sampling by the introduction of a tabu-like algorithm which favors
the progress of a simulation toward productive events and avoids
wastingsimulationtimeinuninterestingportionsofthesearchspac e.
Certainly, a single SuMD trajectory is not suﬃcient to explain
the complex binding process, and the retrieval of thermodynamic
quantities from a single simulation must be avoided. Nevertheless,
a SuMD trajectory depicts one of the possible binding pathways
leading a ligand to reach the target, so it can be useful to propos e a
mechanistichypothesis.
The technique was ﬁrst applied to Adenosine Receptors, where
it facilitated the characterization of the binding pathways of seve ral
ligands toward the receptor, with the exploration of metabinding
sites (Sabbadin and Moro, 2014; Sabbadin et al., 2015 ). In this
context, SuMD can be useful in the interpretation of allosteric
interactions ( Deganutti et al., 2015 ) and has proved to be supportive
to the identiﬁcation of fragment-like positive allosteric modulat ors
(Deganutti and Moro, 2017 ). In fact, SuMD turned out to be
eﬀectiveinsimulatingfragmentcompounds,asshownbytheaccur ate
prediction of the binding mode of a catechol fragment to human
peroxiredoxin5(PRDX5),reachingaminimumRMSDof0.7Åfrom
thecrystallographicpose.
The applicability spectrum of SuMD has been furtherly enlarged,
till the development of pepSuMD, a revised version of the techniqu eable to simulate the binding pathway of a peptide ligand toward its
proteinbindingsite( Salmasoetal.,2017 ).Therecognitionprocessof
theBADpeptidetoBcl-X Lprotein(Figure4B )andofthep53peptide
to MDM2 has been recently reported, with the achievement of an
RMSD less than 5 Å from the experimental conformation in tens of
nanoseconds in both cases (46.2 and 23.40 ns, respectively). D uring
the BAD/Bcl-X Lsimulation, the C-terminal helix explored diﬀerent
conformations, meaning that peptide and protein conformational
rearrangements can be observed during a SuMD simulation
when occurring in the same time scale of the SuMD-accelerated
binding.
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
In this review, an excursus over some relevant computational
techniques in drug discovery has been performed, highlighting
how protein ﬂexibility has been introduced into the simulations
during the years. Starting from simple rigid docking strategies
justiﬁed by the lock-key model, it was soon necessary to conside r
conformational degrees of freedom of ligands during docking.
Experimental data proving the existence of diﬀerent conformations
of protein structures has made the molecular models to face th e
problemofinterpretingandsimulatingconformationaltransition sof
macromolecules.
Fromroughattemptstoincludeproteinﬂexibilityduringclassical
molecular docking, the development of hardware technologies and
of novel MD computational techniques has been allowing more and
more to simulate huge conformational movements. The possibility
to simulate contemporary folding and binding phenomena can be
exploitedtoanswerthelong-standingdebateabout“induced-ﬁt ”and
“conformational selection” binding models, by giving a mechanistic
interpretationofbindingpathways.
Moreover,someoftheenhancedsamplingtechniquesarenomore
anexclusivemethodologicalexercise,buthasbecomewithinreach of
many research groups, whit a consequent real applicability in dru g
discovery.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
VSandSMdevisedtheorganization,themainconceptualideas,pro of
outline and wrote the review. The content of the present work ha s
been largely taken from the PhD thesis entitled Exploring protein
ﬂexibility during docking to investigate ligand-target recognition
writtenbyVSunderthesupervisionofSM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MMS lab is very grateful to Chemical Computing Group, OpenEye,
and Acellera for the scientiﬁc and technical partnership. MMS la b
gratefullyacknowledgesthesupportofNVIDIACorporationwitht he
donationoftheTitanXpGPUusedforthisresearch.
REFERENCES
Abagyan,R.,andTotrov,M.(2001).High-throughputdockingfor leadgeneration.
Curr.Opin.Chem.Biol. 5,375–382.doi:10.1016/S1367-5931(00)00217-9
Abagyan, R., Totrov, M., and Kuznetsov, D. (1994). ICM? A
new method for protein modeling and design: applicationsto docking and structure prediction from the distorted native
conformation. J. Comput. Chem. 15, 488–506. doi: 10.1002/jcc.540
150503
Adcock, S. A., and McCammon, J. A. (2006). Molecular dynamics: sur vey of
methods for simulating the activity of proteins. Chem. Rev. 106, 1589–1615.
doi:10.1021/cr040426m
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 12 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
Alder, B. J., and Wainwright, T. E. (1957). Phase transition for a hard sphere
system.J.Chem.Phys. 27,1208–1209.doi:10.1063/1.1743957
Alonso, H., Bliznyuk, A. A., and Gready, J. E. (2006). Combining do cking and
molecular dynamic simulations in drug design. Med. Res. Rev. 26, 531–568.
doi:10.1002/med.20067
Amaro, R. E., Baron, R., and McCammon, J. A. (2008). An improved relaxed
complex scheme for receptor ﬂexibility in computer-aided drug design. J.
Comput.AidedMol.Des. 22,693–705.doi:10.1007/s10822-007-9159-2
Apostolakis, J., Pluckthun, A., and Caﬂisch, A. (1998). Dockin g small ligands in
ﬂexible binding sites. J. Comput. Chem. 19, 21–37. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-
987X(19980115)19:1<21::AID-JCC2>3.0.CO;2-0
Austin, R. H., Beeson, K. W., Eisenstein, L., Frauenfelder, H., a nd Gunsalus, I. C.
(1975).Dynamicsofligandbindingtomyoglobin. Biochemistry 14,5355–5373.
doi:10.1021/bi00695a021
Barducci, A., Bonomi, M., and Parrinello, M. (2011). Metadynamics. WIREs
Comput.Mol.Sci. 1,826–843.doi:10.1002/wcms.31
Barducci, A., Bussi, G., and Parrinello, M. (2008). Well-tempered metad ynamics:
a smoothly converging and tunable free-energy method. Phys. Rev. Lett.
100:020603.doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.020603
Baxter, C. A., Murray, C. W., Clark, D. E., Westhead, D. R., and
Eldridge, M. D. (1998). Flexible docking using tabu search and
an empirical estimate of binding aﬃnity. Proteins 33, 367–382.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0134(19981115)33:3<367::AID- PROT6>3.0.CO;2-W
Berman, H. M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T. N., We issig,
H., et al. (2000). The protein data bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235–242.
doi:10.1093/nar/28.1.235
Betz, M., Wulsdorf, T., Krimmer, S. G., and Klebe, G. (2016). Impact o f surface
water layers on protein–ligand binding: how well are experimental dat a
reproduced by molecular dynamics simulations in a thermolysin test case? .J.
Chem.Inf.Model. 56,223–233.doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00621
Böhm, H. J. (1994). The development of a simple empirical scoring function
to estimate the binding constant for a protein-ligand complex of kno wn
three-dimensional structure. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 8, 243–256.
doi:10.1007/BF00126743
Born, M., and Oppenheimer, R. (1927). Zur quantentheorie der moleke ln.Ann.
Phys.389,457–484.doi:10.1002/andp.19273892002
Bortolato,A.,Tehan,B.G.,Bodnarchuk,M.S.,Essex,J.W.,an dMason,J.S.(2013).
Waternetworkperturbationinligandbinding:adenosineA(2A)a ntagonistsas
acasestudy. J.Chem.Inf.Model. 53,1700–1713.doi:10.1021/ci4001458
Bowman, G. R., Ensign, D. L., and Pande, V. S. (2010). Enhanced modeling via
network theory: adaptive sampling of Markov state models. J. Chem. Theory
Comput.6,787–794.doi:10.1021/ct900620b
Brooijmans, N., and Kuntz, I. D. (2003). Molecular recognition an d
docking algorithms. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 32, 335–373.
doi:10.1146/annurev.biophys.32.110601.142532
Buch, I., Giorgino, T., and De Fabritiis, G. (2011). Complete reco nstruction of an
enzyme-inhibitor binding process by molecular dynamics simulations .Proc.
Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 108,10184–10189.doi:10.1073/pnas.1103547108
Bussi,G.,Gervasio,F.L.,Laio,A.,andParrinello,M.(2006).F ree-energylandscape
forbetahairpinfoldingfromcombinedparalleltemperingandmetadynamics .
J.Am.Chem.Soc. 128,13435–13441.doi:10.1021/ja062463w
Charifson, P. S., Corkery, J. J., Murcko, M. A., and Walters, W. P. (1999).
Consensus scoring: a method for obtaining improved hit rates from do cking
databases of three-dimensional structures into proteins. J. Med. Chem. 42,
5100–5109.doi:10.1021/jm990352k
Chen, H.-M., Liu, B.-F., Huang, H.-L., Hwang, S.-F., and Ho, S.-Y. (2007).
SODOCK: swarm optimization for highly ﬂexible protein-ligand docki ng.J.
Comput.Chem. 28,612–623.doi:10.1002/jcc.20542
Corbeil,C.R.,Williams,C.I.,andLabute,P.(2012).Variability indockingsuccess
rates due to dataset preparation. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 26, 775–786.
doi:10.1007/s10822-012-9570-1
Cornell,W.D.,Cieplak,P.,Bayly,C.I.,Gould,I.R.,Merz,K.M.,Fer guson,D.M.,
et al. (1995). A second generation force ﬁeld for the simulation of proteins,
nucleic acids, and organic molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 5179–5197.
doi:10.1021/ja00124a002
Csermely, P., Palotai, R., and Nussinov, R. (2010). Induced ﬁt, c onformational
selection and independent dynamic segments: an extended view ofbinding events. Trends Biochem. Sci. 35, 539–546. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2010.
04.009
Cuzzolin, A., Deganutti, G., Salmaso, V., Sturlese, M., and Moro, S .
(2018). AquaMMapS: an alternative tool to monitor the role of water
molecules during protein-ligand association. ChemMedChem 13, 522–531.
doi:10.1002/cmdc.201700564
Cuzzolin, A., Sturlese, M., Deganutti, G., Salmaso, V., Sabbadin , D., Ciancetta,
A., et al. (2016). Deciphering the complexity of ligand-protein recogn ition
pathways using supervised molecular dynamics (SuMD) simulations. J. Chem.
Inf.Model. 56,687–705.doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00702
DeVivo,M.,andCavalli,A.(2017).Recentadvancesindynamicd ockingfordrug
discovery. WIREsComput.Mol.Sci. 7:e1320.doi:10.1002/wcms.1320
De Vivo, M., Masetti, M., Bottegoni, G., and Cavalli, A. (2016) . Role of molecular
dynamicsandrelatedmethodsindrugdiscovery. J.Med.Chem. 59,4035–4061.
doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01684
Deganutti, G., Cuzzolin, A., Ciancetta, A., and Moro, S. (2015 ). Understanding
allosteric interactions in G protein-coupled receptors using supervis ed
molecular dynamics: a prototype study analysing the human A3 adenosin e
receptor positive allosteric modulator LUF6000. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 23,
4065–4071.doi:10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.039
Deganutti, G., and Moro, S. (2017). Supporting the identiﬁcatio n of
novel fragment-based positive allosteric modulators using a supervi sed
molecular dynamics approach: a retrospective analysis considering the
human A2A adenosine receptor as a key example. Molecules 22:818.
doi:10.3390/molecules22050818
DesJarlais, R. L., Sheridan, R. P., Dixon, J. S., Kuntz, I. D., an d Venkataraghavan,
R. (1986). Docking ﬂexible ligands to macromolecular receptors by molec ular
shape.J.Med.Chem. 29,2149–2153.doi:10.1021/jm00161a004
Doerr, S., and De Fabritiis, G. (2014). On-the-ﬂy learning and sa mpling of ligand
binding by high-throughput molecular simulations. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
10,2064–2069.doi:10.1021/ct400919u
Dror, R. O., Pan, A. C., Arlow, D. H., Borhani, D. W., Maragakis, P.,
Shan, Y., et al. (2011). Pathway and mechanism of drug binding to G-
protein-coupled receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 13118–13123.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1104614108
Duan, Y., and Kollman, P. A. (1998). Pathways to a protein folding in termediate
observed in a 1-microsecond simulation in aqueous solution. Science282,
740–744.doi:10.1126/science.282.5389.740
Durrant,J.D.,andMcCammon,J.A.(2011).Moleculardynamicssimulat ionsand
drugdiscovery. BMCBiol. 9:71.doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-71
Durrant, J. D., Urbaniak, M. D., Ferguson, M. A., and McCammon, J.
A. (2010). Computer-aided identiﬁcation of Trypanosoma brucei uri dine
diphosphate galactose 4’-epimerase inhibitors: toward the developme nt of
novel therapies for African sleeping sickness. J. Med. Chem. 53, 5025–5032.
doi:10.1021/jm100456a
Ebejer,J.-P.,Fulle,S.,Morris,G.M.,andFinn,P.W.(2013).Th eemergingroleof
cloud computing in molecular modelling. J. Mol. Graph. Model. 44, 177–187.
doi:10.1016/j.jmgm.2013.06.002
Eldridge,M.D.,Murray,C.W.,Auton,T.R.,Paolini,G.V.,andMee ,R.P.(1997).
Empirical scoring functions: I. The development of a fast empirical sco ring
function to estimate the binding aﬃnity of ligands in receptor co mplexes. J.
Comput.AidedMol.Des. 11,425–445.doi:10.1023/A:1007996124545
Fischer, E. (1894). Einﬂuss der conﬁguration auf die wirkung d er enzyme. Ber.
Dtsch.ChemischenGes. 27,2985–2993.doi:10.1002/cber.18940270364
Foote, J., and Milstein, C. (1994). Conformational isomerism and the
diversity of antibodies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 10370–10374.
doi:10.1073/pnas.91.22.10370
Frauenfelder, H., Sligar, S. G., and Wolynes, P. G. (1991). The ene rgy landscapes
and motions of proteins. Science254, 1598–1603. doi: 10.1126/science.17
49933
Friedrichs,M.S.,Eastman,P.,Vaidyanathan,V.,Houston,M.,L egrand,S.,Beberg,
A. L., et al. (2009). Accelerating molecular dynamic simulation on graph ics
processingunits. J.Comput.Chem. 30,864–872.doi:10.1002/jcc.21209
Friesner, R. A., Banks, J. L., Murphy, R. B., Halgren, T. A., Klicic, J. J., Mainz, D.
T.,etal.(2004).Glide:anewapproachforrapid,accuratedockingan dscoring.
1. Method and assessment of docking accuracy. J. Med. Chem. 47, 1739–1749.
doi:10.1021/jm0306430
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 13 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
Friesner, R. A., Murphy, R. B., Repasky, M. P., Frye, L. L., Greenwoo d, J. R.,
Halgren, T. A., et al. (2006). Extra precision glide: docking and sco ring
incorporatingamodelofhydrophobicenclosureforprotein-ligandcomplex es.
J.Med.Chem. 49,6177–6196.doi:10.1021/jm051256o
Fukunishi, H., Watanabe, O., and Takada, S. (2002). On the hami ltonian replica
exchangemethodforeﬃcientsamplingofbiomolecularsystems:applicat ionto
proteinstructureprediction. J.Chem.Phys. 116:9058.doi:10.1063/1.1472510
Ganser, L. R., Lee, J., Rangadurai, A., Merriman, D. K., Kelly, M. L. , Kansal,
A. D., et al. (2018). High-performance virtual screening by targeti ng a high-
resolution RNA dynamic ensemble. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 25, 425–434.
doi:10.1038/s41594-018-0062-4
Gervasio, F. L., Laio, A., and Parrinello, M. (2005). Flexible dock ing in solution
usingmetadynamics. J.Am.Chem.Soc. 127,2600–2607.doi:10.1021/ja0445950
Gohlke, H., Hendlich, M., and Klebe, G. (2000). Knowledge-based sc oring
function to predict protein-ligand interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 295, 337–356.
doi:10.1006/jmbi.1999.3371
Goodsell, D. S., and Olson, A. J. (1990). Automated docking of
substrates to proteins by simulated annealing. Proteins 8, 195–202.
doi:10.1002/prot.340080302
Halgren,T.A.,Murphy,R.B.,Friesner,R.A.,Beard,H.S.,Frye,L.L. ,Pollard,W.
T.,etal.(2004).Glide:anewapproachforrapid,accuratedockingan dscoring.
2. Enrichment factors in database screening. J. Med. Chem. 47, 1750–1759.
doi:10.1021/jm030644s
Halperin, I., Ma, B., Wolfson, H., and Nussinov, R. (2002). Principle s of docking:
anoverviewofsearchalgorithmsandaguidetoscoringfunctions .Proteins47,
409–443.doi:10.1002/prot.10115
Hamelberg, D., Mongan, J., and McCammon, J. A. (2004). Accelerated molecular
dynamics: a promising and eﬃcient simulation method for biomolecules. J.
Chem.Phys. 120,11919–11929.doi:10.1063/1.1755656
Harvey, M. J., and De Fabritiis, G. (2012). High-throughput molecu lar dynamics:
the powerful new tool for drug discovery. Drug Discov. Today 17, 1059–1062.
doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2012.03.017
Harvey, M. J., and De Fabritiis, G. (2015). Acecloud: molecular
dynamics simulations in the cloud. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 55, 909–914.
doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00086
Harvey, M. J., Giupponi, G., and Fabritiis, G. D. (2009). ACEMD: accelerating
biomolecular dynamics in the microsecond time scale. J. Chem. Theory
Comput.5,1632–1639.doi:10.1021/ct9000685
Henzler-Wildman, K., and Kern, D. (2007). Dynamic personalities of pro teins.
Nature450,964–972.doi:10.1038/nature06522
Huang,S.-Y.,andZou,X.(2007).Ensembledockingofmultipleproteins tructures:
considering protein structural variations in molecular docking. Proteins66,
399–421.doi:10.1002/prot.21214
Huang, S.-Y., and Zou, X. (2010). Advances and challenges in protei n-ligand
docking.Int.J.Mol.Sci. 11,3016–3034.doi:10.3390/ijms11083016
Huey, R., Morris, G. M., Olson, A. J., and Goodsell, D. S. (2007). A se miempirical
free energy force ﬁeld with charge-based desolvation. J. Comput. Chem. 28,
1145–1152.doi:10.1002/jcc.20634
Isralewitz, B., Gao, M., and Schulten, K. (2001). Steered molecular dynamics
and mechanical functions of proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 224–230.
doi:10.1016/S0959-440X(00)00194-9
Isralewitz, B., Izrailev, S., and Schulten, K. (1997). Binding pat hway of retinal to
bacterio-opsin:apredictionbymoleculardynamicssimulations. Biophys.J. 73,
2972–2979.doi:10.1016/S0006-3495(97)78326-7
Izrailev, S., Crofts, A. R., Berry, E. A., and Schulten, K. (1999). S teered molecular
dynamics simulation of the Rieske subunit motion in the cytochrome bc(1)
complex. Biophys.J. 77,1753–1768.doi:10.1016/S0006-3495(99)77022-0
Izrailev, S., Stepaniants, S., Balsera, M., Oono, Y., and Schulten , K. (1997).
Moleculardynamicsstudyofunbindingoftheavidin-biotincomple x.Biophys.
J.72,1568–1581.doi:10.1016/S0006-3495(97)78804-0
Jiang, F., and Kim, S. H. (1991). “Soft docking”: matching of molec ular surface
cubes.J.Mol.Biol. 219,79–102.doi:10.1016/0022-2836(91)90859-5
Jones, G., Willett, P., and Glen, R. C. (1995). Molecular recogniti on of receptor
sites using a genetic algorithm with a description of desolvation .J. Mol. Biol.
245,43–53.doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(95)80037-9
Jones,G.,Willett,P.,Glen,R.C.,Leach,A.R.,andTaylor,R.(1 997).Development
and validation of a genetic algorithm for ﬂexible docking. J. Mol. Biol. 267,
727–748.doi:10.1006/jmbi.1996.0897Jorgensen, W. L., and Tirado-Rives, J. (1988). The OPLS [optimi zed potentials
for liquid simulations] potential functions for proteins, energy minimizations
for crystals of cyclic peptides and crambin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 110, 1657–1666.
doi:10.1021/ja00214a001
Kappel, K., Miao, Y., and McCammon, J. A. (2015). Accelerated molecular
dynamics simulations of ligand binding to a muscarinic G-protein-
coupled receptor. Q. Rev. Biophys. 48, 479–487. doi: 10.1017/S0033583515
000153
Kästner, J. (2011). Umbrella sampling. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 1, 932–942.
doi:10.1002/wcms.66
Kästner, J., and Thiel, W. (2005). Bridging the gap between the rmodynamic
integration and umbrella sampling provides a novel analysis method:
“Umbrellaintegration”. J.Chem.Phys. 123:144104.doi:10.1063/1.2052648
Khar, K. R., Goldschmidt, L., and Karanicolas, J. (2013). Fast do cking
on graphics processing units via Ray-Casting. PLoS ONE 8:e70661.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0070661
Kitchen, D. B., Decornez, H., Furr, J. R., and Bajorath, J. (2004) . Docking and
scoringinvirtualscreeningfordrugdiscovery:methodsandapplicat ions.Nat.
Rev.DrugDiscov. 3,935–949.doi:10.1038/nrd1549
Kmiecik, S., Gront, D., Kolinski, M., Wieteska, L., Dawid, A. E. , and Kolinski, A.
(2016).Coarse-grainedproteinmodelsandtheirapplications. Chem.Rev. 116,
7898–7936.doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00163
Knegtel, R. M., Kuntz, I. D., and Oshiro, C. M. (1997). Molecular
docking to ensembles of protein structures. J. Mol. Biol. 266, 424–440.
doi:10.1006/jmbi.1996.0776
Kobilka, B. K., and Deupi, X. (2007). Conformational complexity of
G-protein-coupled receptors. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 28, 397–406.
doi:10.1016/j.tips.2007.06.003
Kokubo, H., Tanaka, T., and Okamoto, Y. (2011). Ab initio predict ion of protein-
ligand binding structures by replica-exchange umbrella sampling simulatio ns.
J.Comput.Chem. 32,2810–2821.doi:10.1002/jcc.21860
Kokubo, H., Tanaka, T., and Okamoto, Y. (2013). Prediction of prot ein–
ligand binding structures by replica-exchange umbrella sampling simulatio ns:
application to kinase systems. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9, 4660–4671.
doi:10.1021/ct4004383
Korb,O., Stützle,T., andExner,T.E.(2006).“PLANTS: applicat ion ofantcolony
optimization to structure-based drug design,” in Ant Colony Optimization
and Swarm Intelligence , eds M. Dorigo, L. M. Gambardella, M. Birattari, A.
Martinoli,R.Poli,andT.Stützle(Berlin;Heidelberg:Springer),247– 258.
Korb, O., Stützle, T., and Exner, T. E. (2009). Empirical scoring f unctions for
advancedprotein-liganddockingwithPLANTS. J.Chem.Inf.Model. 49,84–96.
doi:10.1021/ci800298z
Korb, O., Stützle, T., and Exner, T. E. (2011). Accelerating molec ular docking
calculations using graphics processing units. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 51, 865–876.
doi:10.1021/ci100459b
Koshland, D. E. (1958). Application of a theory of enzyme speciﬁcity to protein
synthesis. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 44,98–104.doi:10.1073/pnas.44.2.98
Kruse, A. C., Hu, J., Pan, A. C., Arlow, D. H., Rosenbaum, D. M., Rosemo nd,
E., et al. (2012). Structure and dynamics of the M3 muscarinic acety lcholine
receptor. Nature482,552–556.doi:10.1038/nature10867
Kumar, S., Ma, B., Tsai, C. J., Sinha, N., and Nussinov, R. (200 0). Folding and
binding cascades: dynamic landscapes and population shifts. Protein Sci. 9,
10–19.doi:10.1110/ps.9.1.10
Kumar, S., Rosenberg, J. M., Bouzida, D., Swendsen, R. H., and K ollman,
P. A. (1992). THE weighted histogram analysis method for free-ene rgy
calculationsonbiomolecules.I.Themethod .J.Comput.Chem. 13,1011–1021.
doi:10.1002/jcc.540130812
Kuntz, I. D., Blaney, J. M., Oatley, S. J., Langridge, R., and Ferri n, T. E. (1982).
A geometric approach to macromolecule-ligand interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 161,
269–288.doi:10.1016/0022-2836(82)90153-X
Laio, A., and Gervasio, F. L. (2008). Metadynamics: a method to simulate
rare events and reconstruct the free energy in biophysics, chemistry and
material science. Rep. Prog. Phys. 71:126601. doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/71/12/
126601
Laio,A.,andParrinello,M.(2002).Escapingfree-energyminima. Proc.Natl.Acad.
Sci.U.S.A. 99,12562–12566.doi:10.1073/pnas.202427399
Leach,A.R.(1994).Liganddockingtoproteinswithdiscretesi de-chainﬂexibility.
J.Mol.Biol. 235,345–356.doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80038-5
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 14 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
Leach, A. R. (2001). Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications . illustrated.
Pearson Education. Available online at: https://books.google. it/books/about/
Molecular_Modelling.html?id=kB7jsbV-uhkC&redir_esc=y
Li, Z., and Lazaridis, T. (2003). Thermodynamic contributions of the ordered
water molecule in HIV-1 protease. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 6636–6637.
doi:10.1021/ja0299203
Limongelli, V., Bonomi, M., and Parrinello, M. (2013). Funnel metadyn amics
as accurate binding free-energy method. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110,
6358–6363.doi:10.1073/pnas.1303186110
Lin, J.-H., Perryman, A. L., Schames, J. R., and McCammon, J. A. (2002 ).
Computational drug design accommodating receptor ﬂexibility: the re laxed
complexscheme. J.Am.Chem.Soc. 124,5632–5633.doi:10.1021/ja0260162
Lin, J.-H., Perryman, A. L., Schames, J. R., and McCammon, J. A. (2003 ).
The relaxed complex method: accommodating receptor ﬂexibility for
drug design with an improved scoring scheme. Biopolymers 68, 47–62.
doi:10.1002/bip.10218
Lindorﬀ-Larsen, K., Maragakis, P., Piana, S., and Shaw, D. E. (2016). Picosecond
to millisecond structural dynamics in human ubiquitin. J. Phys. Chem. B 120,
8313–8320.doi:10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b02024
Liu, M., and Wang, S. (1999). MCDOCK: a Monte Carlo simulation approa ch
to the molecular docking problem. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 13, 435–451.
doi:10.1023/A:1008005918983
Liu, P., Kim, B., Friesner, R. A., and Berne, B. J. (2005). Replica e xchange with
solute tempering: a method for sampling biological systems in explicit wa ter.
Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 102,13749–13754.doi:10.1073/pnas.0506346102
Lüdemann, S. K., Lounnas, V., and Wade, R. C. (2000). How do subs trates enter
and products exit the buried active site of cytochrome P450cam? 1. R andom
expulsion molecular dynamics investigation of ligand access chann els and
mechanisms. J.Mol.Biol. 303,797–811.doi:10.1006/jmbi.2000.4154
MacKerell, A. D., Bashford, D., Bellott, M., Dunbrack, R. L., Evanse ck, J.
D., Field, M. J., et al. (1998). All-atom empirical potential for molecu lar
modeling and dynamics studies of proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 3586–3616.
doi:10.1021/jp973084f
McCammon, J. A., Gelin, B. R., and Karplus, M. (1977). Dynamics of fold ed
proteins. Nature267,585–590.doi:10.1038/267585a0
McMartin, C., and Bohacek, R. S. (1997). QXP: powerful, rapid compute r
algorithms for structure-based drug design. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 11,
333–344.doi:10.1023/A:1007907728892
Meiler, J., and Baker, D. (2006). ROSETTALIGAND: protein-small
molecule docking with full side-chain ﬂexibility. Proteins 65, 538–548.
doi:10.1002/prot.21086
Miller, D. W., and Dill, K. A. (1997). Ligand binding to proteins: th e
binding landscape model. Protein Sci. 6, 2166–2179. doi: 10.1002/pro.55600
61011
Miller,M.D.,Kearsley,S.K.,Underwood,D.J.,andSheridan,R.P. (1994).FLOG:a
systemtoselect“quasi-ﬂexible”ligandscomplementarytoareceptoro fknown
three-dimensionalstructure. J.Comput.AidedMol.Des. 8,153–174.
Monod, J., Wyman, J., and Changeux, J. P. (1965). ON THE NATURE OF
ALLOSTERIC TRANSITIONS: A PLAUSIBLE MODEL. J. Mol. Biol. 12,
88–118.doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(65)80285-6
Mooij,W.T.,andVerdonk,M.L.(2005).Generalandtargetedst atisticalpotentials
for protein-ligand interactions. Proteins 61, 272–287. doi: 10.1002/prot.
20588
Morris, G. M., Goodsell, D. S., Halliday, R. S., Huey, R., Hart, W. E., B elew, R. K.,
et al. (1998). Automated docking using a Lamarckian genetic algo rithm and
an empirical binding free energy function. J. Comput. Chem. 19, 1639–1662.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(19981115)19:14<1639::AID -JCC10>3.0.CO;2-B
Morris, G. M., Goodsell, D. S., Huey, R., and Olson, A. J. (1996).
Distributed automated docking of ﬂexible ligands to proteins: paralle l
applications of AutoDock 2.4. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 10, 293–304.
doi:10.1007/BF00124499
Namasivayam,V.,andGünther,R.(2007).pso@autodock:afastﬂ exiblemolecular
docking program based on Swarm intelligence. Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 70,
475–484.doi:10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00588.x
Ng, M. C., Fong, S., and Siu, S. W. (2015). PSOVina: the hybrid pa rticle swarm
optimizationalgorithmforprotein-liganddocking. J.Bioinform.Comput.Biol.
13:1541007.doi:10.1142/S0219720015410073Nobile, M. S., Cazzaniga, P., Tangherloni, A., and Besozzi, D. ( 2017). Graphics
processingunitsinbioinformatics,computationalbiologyandsys temsbiology.
BriefBioinform. 18,870–885.doi:10.1093/bib/bbw058
Okazaki, K., and Takada, S. (2008). Dynamic energy landscape vi ew of
coupled binding and protein conformational change: induced-ﬁt ve rsus
population-shift mechanisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 11182–11187.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0802524105
Oostenbrink, C., Villa, A., Mark, A. E., and van Gunsteren, W. F. (2 004). A
biomolecularforceﬁeldbasedonthefreeenthalpyofhydrationandso lvation:
theGROMOSforce-ﬁeldparametersets53A5and53A6. J.Comput.Chem. 25,
1656–1676.doi:10.1002/jcc.20090
Osguthorpe, D. J., Sherman, W., and Hagler, A. T. (2012). Exploring prot ein
ﬂexibility: incorporating structural ensembles from crystal structure s and
simulation into virtual screening protocols. J. Phys. Chem. B 116, 6952–6959.
doi:10.1021/jp3003992
Pande, V. S., Baker, I., Chapman, J., Elmer, S. P., Khaliq, S., Lars on, S. M.,
et al. (2003). Atomistic protein folding simulations on the submillise cond
time scale using worldwide distributed computing. Biopolymers 68, 91–109.
doi:10.1002/bip.10219
Pande,V.S.,Beauchamp,K.,andBowman,G.R.(2010).Everything youwantedto
know about Markov State Models but were afraid to ask. Methods52, 99–105.
doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.06.002
Pang,Y.-P.,Perola,E.,Xu,K.,andPrendergast,F.G.(2001).EUD OC:acomputer
program for identiﬁcation of drug interaction sites in macromolecules and
drug leads from chemical databases. J. Comput. Chem. 22, 1750–1771.
doi:10.1002/jcc.1129
Patel, J. S., Berteotti, A., Ronsisvalle, S., Rocchia, W., and Ca valli, A.
(2014). Steered molecular dynamics simulations for studying protein -ligand
interaction in cyclin-dependent kinase 5. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 54, 470–480.
doi:10.1021/ci4003574
Patriksson, A., and van der Spoel, D. (2008). A temperature predictor f or
parallel tempering simulations. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 10, 2073–2077.
doi:10.1039/b716554d
Paul, F., Noé, F., and Weikl, T. R. (2018). Identifying conformat ional-selection
and induced-ﬁt aspects in the binding-induced folding of PMI f rom Markov
state modeling of atomistic simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B. 122, 5649–5656.
doi:10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b12146
Paul, F., Wehmeyer, C., Abualrous, E. T., Wu, H., Crabtree, M. D.,
Schöneberg, J., et al. (2017). Protein-peptide association kin etics beyond
the seconds timescale from atomistic simulations. Nat. Commun. 8:1095.
doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01163-6
Pei, J., Wang, Q., Liu, Z., Li, Q., Yang, K., and Lai, L. (2006) . PSI-DOCK: towards
highly eﬃcient and accurate ﬂexible ligand docking. Proteins62, 934–946.
doi:10.1002/prot.20790
Petros, A. M., Nettesheim, D. G., Wang, Y., Olejniczak, E. T., Me adows, R. P.,
Mack, J., et al. (2000). Rationale for Bcl-xL/Bad peptide complex forma tion
fromstructure,mutagenesis,andbiophysicalstudies. ProteinSci. 9,2528–2534.
doi:10.1110/ps.9.12.2528
Prinz, J.-H., Wu, H., Sarich, M., Keller, B., Senne, M., Held, M., et al. (2011).
Markovmodelsofmolecularkinetics:generationandvalidation. J.Chem.Phys.
134:174105.doi:10.1063/1.3565032
Rarey, M., Kramer, B., Lengauer, T., and Klebe, G. (1996). A fast ﬂ exible
dockingmethodusinganincrementalconstructionalgorithm. J.Mol.Biol. 261,
470–489.doi:10.1006/jmbi.1996.0477
Rastelli, G., Degliesposti, G., Del Rio, A., and Sgobba, M. (2009 ). Binding
estimation after reﬁnement, a new automated procedure for the reﬁneme nt
andrescoringofdockedligandsinvirtualscreening. Chem.Biol.DrugDes. 73,
283–286.doi:10.1111/j.1747-0285.2009.00780.x
Rosta, E., and Hummer, G. (2015). Free energies from dynamic weight ed
histogram analysis using unbiased Markov state model. J. Chem. Theory
Comput.11,276–285.doi:10.1021/ct500719p
Ruiz-Carmona, S., Alvarez-Garcia, D., Foloppe, N., Garmendia-Doval, A. B.,
Juhos, S., Schmidtke, P., et al. (2014). rDock: a fast, versatile and open source
programfordockingligandstoproteinsandnucleicacids. PLoSComput.Biol.
10:e1003571.doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003571
Sabbadin, D., Ciancetta, A., Deganutti, G., Cuzzolin, A., an d Moro, S. (2015).
Exploring the recognition pathway at the human A2A adenosine recepto r
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 15 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
Salmaso and Moro Molecular Docking and Dynamics Overview
of the endogenous agonist adenosine using supervised molecular dynamics
simulations. Medchemcomm 6,1081–1085.doi:10.1039/C5MD00016E
Sabbadin, D., Ciancetta, A., and Moro, S. (2014). Bridging molec ular docking to
membrane molecular dynamics to investigate GPCR-ligand recognition : the
humanA2Aadenosinereceptorasakeystudy. J.Chem.Inf.Model. 54,169–183.
doi:10.1021/ci400532b
Sabbadin, D., and Moro, S. (2014). Supervised molecular dynamics ( SuMD)
as a helpful tool to depict GPCR-ligand recognition pathway in a
nanosecond time scale. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 54, 372–376. doi: 10.1021/ci40
0766b
Saleh, N., Ibrahim, P., Saladino, G., Gervasio, F. L., and Clark, T. (2017). An
eﬃcient metadynamics-based protocol to model the binding aﬃnity and the
transition state ensemble of G-protein-coupled receptor ligands. J. Chem. Inf.
Model.57,1210–1217.doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00772
Salmaso, V. (2018) Exploring Protein Flexibility During Docking to Investiga te
ligand-TargetRecognition. Ph.D.thesis,UniversityofPadova,Padova.
Salmaso,V.,Sturlese,M.,Cuzzolin,A.,andMoro,S.(2016).DockB enchasdocking
selector tool: the lesson learned from D3R grand challenge 2015. J. Comput.
AidedMol.Des. 30,773–789.doi:10.1007/s10822-016-9966-4
Salmaso, V., Sturlese, M., Cuzzolin, A., and Moro, S. (2017). Explorin g
protein-peptide recognition pathways using a supervised molecular dy namics
approach. Structure 25,655.e2–662.e2.doi:10.1016/j.str.2017.02.009
Salmaso, V., Sturlese, M., Cuzzolin, A., and Moro, S. (2018). Combin ing self-
and cross-docking as benchmark tools: the performance of DockBench
in the D3R grand challenge 2. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 32, 251–264.
doi:10.1007/s10822-017-0051-4
Sauton, N., Lagorce, D., Villoutreix, B. O., and Miteva, M. A. (2 008).
MS-DOCK: accurate multiple conformation generator and rigid docking
protocol for multi-step virtual ligand screening. BMC Bioinformatics 9:184.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-9-184
Schames, J. R., Henchman, R. H., Siegel, J. S., Sotriﬀer, C. A., Ni, H. , and
McCammon,J.A.(2004).DiscoveryofanovelbindingtrenchinHIVi ntegrase.
J.Med.Chem. 47,1879–1881.doi:10.1021/jm0341913
Schlitter, J., Engels, M., Krüger, P., Jacoby, E., and Wollmer, A. ( 1993).
Targeted molecular dynamics simulation of conformational change-
application to the T ↔R transition in insulin. Mol. Simul. 10, 291–308.
doi:10.1080/08927029308022170
Shan,Y.,Kim,E.T.,Eastwood,M.P.,Dror,R.O.,Seeliger,M.A. ,andShaw,D.E.
(2011).Howdoesadrugmoleculeﬁnditstargetbindingsite? J.Am.Chem.Soc.
133,9181–9183.doi:10.1021/ja202726y
Shaw, D. E., Chao, J. C., Eastwood, M. P., Gagliardo, J., Grossman , J. P., Ho, C.
R., et al. (2008). Anton, a special-purpose machine for molecular dynami cs
simulation. Commun.ACM 51,91–97.doi:10.1145/1364782.1364802
Shaw, D. E., Maragakis, P., Lindorﬀ-Larsen, K., Piana, S., Dro r, R. O., Eastwood,
M.P.,etal.(2010).Atomic-levelcharacterizationofthestructu raldynamicsof
proteins. Science330,341–346.doi:10.1126/science.1187409
Shirts, M., and Pande, V. S. (2000). COMPUTING: screen savers o f the world
unite!.Science290,1903–1904.doi:10.1126/science.290.5498.1903
Sliwoski, G., Kothiwale, S., Meiler, J., and Lowe, E. W. (2014).
Computational methods in drug discovery. Pharmacol. Rev. 66, 334–395.
doi:10.1124/pr.112.007336
Spyrakis, F., Ahmed, M. H., Bayden, A. S., Cozzini, P., Mozzarelli, A ., and
Kellogg, G. E. (2017). The roles of water in the protein matrix: a largely
untapped resource for drug discovery. J. Med. Chem. 60, 6781–6827.
doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00057
Spyrakis, F., Benedetti, P., Decherchi, S., Rocchia, W., Cava lli, A., Alcaro, S., et al.
(2015). A pipeline to enhance ligand virtual screening: integratin g molecular
dynamics and ﬁngerprints for ligand and proteins. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 55,
2256–2274.doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00169
Strecker,C.,andMeyer,B.(2018).Plasticityofthebindings iteofrenin:optimized
selection of protein structures for ensemble docking. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 58,
1121–1131.doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00010
Sugita, Y., Kitao, A., and Okamoto, Y. (2000). Multidimensiona l replica-
exchange method for free-energy calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 113, 6042–6051.
doi:10.1063/1.1308516
Sugita, Y., and Okamoto, Y. (1999). Replica-exchange molecular
dynamics method for protein folding. Chem. Phys. Lett. 314, 141–151.
doi:10.1016/S0009-2614(99)01123-9Talele, T. T., Khedkar, S. A., and Rigby, A. C. (2010). Successf ul applications of
computeraideddrugdiscovery:movingdrugsfromconcepttotheclinic .Curr.
Top.Med.Chem. 10,127–141.doi:10.2174/156802610790232251
Taylor, R. D., Jewsbury, P. J., and Essex, J. W. (2002). A review o f protein-
small molecule docking methods. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 16, 151–166.
doi:10.1023/A:1020155510718
Teague,S.J.(2003).Implicationsofproteinﬂexibilityfordrugdi scovery.Nat.Rev.
DrugDiscov. 2,527–541.doi:10.1038/nrd1129
Torrie, G. M., and Valleau, J. P. (1977). Nonphysical sampling distrib utions in
Monte Carlo free-energy estimation: umbrella sampling. J. Comput. Phys. 23,
187–199.doi:10.1016/0021-9991(77)90121-8
Trott, O., and Olson, A. J. (2010). AutoDock Vina: improving the spe ed and
accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, eﬃcient optimiz ation, and
multithreading. J.Comput.Chem. 31,455–461.doi:10.1002/jcc.21334
VanDrie,J.H.(2007).Computer-aideddrugdesign:thenext20yea rs.J.Comput.
AidedMol.Des. 21,591–601.doi:10.1007/s10822-007-9142-y
Van Meel, J. A., Arnold, A., Frenkel, D., Portegies Zwart, S. F., and B elleman,
R. G. (2008). Harvesting graphics power for MD simulations. Mol. Simul. 34,
259–266.doi:10.1080/08927020701744295
Vanommeslaeghe, K., Guvench, O., and MacKerell, A. D. (2014).
Molecular mechanics. Curr. Pharm. Des. 20, 3281–3292.
doi:10.2174/13816128113199990600
Velec, H. F. G., Gohlke, H., and Klebe, G. (2005). DrugScore(CSD)-kn owledge-
based scoring function derived from small molecule crystal data with s uperior
recognition rate of near-native ligand poses and better aﬃnity pre diction.J.
Med.Chem. 48,6296–6303.doi:10.1021/jm050436v
Verdonk, M. L., Cole, J. C., Hartshorn, M. J., Murray, C. W., and Taylo r, R. D.
(2003). Improved protein-ligand docking using GOLD. Proteins52, 609–623.
doi:10.1002/prot.10465
Vieth,M.,Hirst,J.D.,Kolinski,A.,andBrooks,C.L.III.(199 9).Assessingenergy
functionsforﬂexibledocking. J.Comput.Chem. 19,1612–1622.
Vuong, Q. V., Nguyen, T. T., and Li, M. S. (2015). A new method fo r navigating
optimal direction for pulling ligand from binding pocket: application to
ranking binding aﬃnity by steered molecular dynamics. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
55,2731–2738.doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00386
Wang, T., and Duan, Y. (2009). Ligand entry and exit pathways
in the beta2-adrenergic receptor. J. Mol. Biol. 392, 1102–1115.
doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2009.07.093
Welch,W.,Ruppert,J.,andJain,A.N.(1996).Hammerhead:fast,fu llyautomated
docking of ﬂexible ligands to protein binding sites. Chem. Biol. 3, 449–462.
doi:10.1016/S1074-5521(96)90093-9
Wood, J. M., Maibaum, J., Rahuel, J., Grütter, M. G., Cohen, N.-C ., Rasetti,
V., et al. (2003). Structure-based design of aliskiren, a novel ora lly
eﬀective renin inhibitor. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 308, 698–705.
doi:10.1016/S0006-291X(03)01451-7
Wu,H.,Paul,F.,Wehmeyer,C.,andNoé,F.(2016).MultiensembleMa rkovmodels
of molecular thermodynamics and kinetics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113,
E3221–E3230.doi:10.1073/pnas.1525092113
Yu, J., Ciancetta, A., Dudas, S., Duca, S., Lottermoser, J., an d Jacobson, K. A.
(2018).Structure-guidedmodiﬁcationofheterocyclicantagoni stsoftheP2Y14
receptor. J.Med.Chem. 61,4860–4882.doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.8b00168
Yuriev,E.,Holien,J.,andRamsland,P.A.(2015).Improvements,trend s,andnew
ideasinmoleculardocking:2012-2013inreview. J.Mol.Recognit. 28,581–604.
doi:10.1002/jmr.2471
Zhou,H.-X.(2010).Frominducedﬁttoconformationalselection:a continuumof
binding mechanism controlled by the timescale of conformational tran sitions.
Biophys.J. 98,L15–L17.doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2009.11.029
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
beconstruedasapotentialconﬂictofinterest.
Copyright © 2018 Salmaso and Moro. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotco mplywiththeseterms.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 16 August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 923
